International Statistical
Classification of
Diseases and Related
Health Problems
Tenth Revision
Volume One — Tabular List
Canadian Institute for Health Information
2009
Contents of this publication may be reproduced in whole or in
part for internal, non-commercial use only provided that full
acknowledgement is given to the Canadian Institute for Health
Information.
Canadian Institute for Health Information
495 Richmond Road
Suite 600
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K2A 4H6
Telephone: (613)241-7860
Fax: (613)241-8120
Web Site: www.cihi.ca
ISBN 1-55392-804-0 (PDF) — Volume 1—International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems, Tenth Revision, Canada (ICD-10-CA) - Tabular List
ISBN 1-55392-805-9 (PDF) — Volume 2—International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems, Tenth Revision, Canada (ICD-10-CA) - Alphabetical Index
ISBN 1-55392-806-7 (PDF) — Volume 3—Canadian Classification of Health Interventions (CCI) - Tabular List
ISBN 1-55392-807-5 (PDF) — Volume 4—Canadian Classification of Health Interventions (CCI) - Alphabetical
Index
Ces publications sont disponibles en français sous les titres:
Volume 1 — Classification statistique internationale des maladies et des problèmes de santé connexes, Dixième
révision, Canada (CIM-10-CA) - Table analytique ISBN 1-55392-808-3 (PDF)
Volume 2 — Classification statistique internationale des maladies et des problèmes de santé connexes, Dixième
révision, Canada (CIM-10-CA) - Index alphabétique ISBN 1-55392-809-1 (PDF)
Volume 3 — Classification canadienne des interventions en santé (CCI) - Table analytique
ISBN 1-55392-810-5 (PDF)
Volume 4 — Classification canadienne des interventions en santé (CCI) - Index alphabétique
ISBN 1-55392-811-3 (PDF)
ICD-10-CA is based upon the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, Tenth
Revision (ICD-10). © World Health Organization 1992. All rights reserved.
Modified by permission for Canadian Government purposes, by the Canadian Institute for Health Information.
© 2009 Canadian Institute for Health Information
TM Registered Trade-mark of the Canadian Institute for Health Information
Contents
About the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) 1
Contact Us for More Information About 3
ICD-10-CA and CCI 
Preface 5
Acknowledgements 7
Introduction 9
Updates 11
Conventions used in the Tabular List of Diseases 13
Basic Coding Guidelines 17
WHO Collaborating Centres for Classification of Diseases 19
Report of the International Conference for the Tenth Revision of the 21
International Classification of Diseases 
Maintenance and Development of ICD-10-CA Enhancements 31
Conventions used in the Alphabetical Index 33
Diagrams in ICD-10-CA 35
Tabular list of inclusions and four-character subcategories 39
I Certain infectious and parasitic diseases (A00-B99) 41
II Neoplasms (C00-D48) 101
III Diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and certain disorders 149
    involving the immune mechanism (D50-D89) 
IV Endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (E00-E90) 167
V Mental and behavioural disorders (F00-F99) 211
VI Diseases of the nervous system (G00-G99) 283
VII Diseases of the eye and adnexa (H00-H59) 315
VIII Diseases of the ear and mastoid process (H60-H95) 341
IX Diseases of the circulatory system (I00-I99) 351
X Diseases of the respiratory system (J00-J99) 385
XI Diseases of the digestive system (K00-K93) 411
XII Diseases of the skin and subcutaneous tissue (L00-L99) 453
XIII Diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective tissue (M00-M99) 479
iii
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
XIV Diseases of the genitourinary system (N00-N99) 569
XV Pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O00-O99) 607
XVI Certain conditions originating in the perinatal period (P00-P96) 663
XVII Congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities 687
     (Q00-Q99) 
Symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, 731
not elsewhere classified (R00-R99) 
XIX Injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98) 765
XX External causes of morbidity and mortality (V01-Y98) 885
XXI Factors influencing health status and contact with health services (Z00-Z99) 963
XXII Morphology of Neoplasms 1003
XXIII Provisional Codes for Research and Temporary Assignment 1017
XVIII
Special tabulation lists for mortality and morbidity 1031
Appendix A - New ICD-10-CA Codes for 2009 1049
Appendix B - Disabled ICD-10-CA Codes for 2009 1057
iv
About the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI)
CIHI is an independent, pan-Canadian, not-for-profit organization working to improve the health of Canadians and the health care
system by providing quality, reliable and timely health information.
CIHI is governed by a Board of Directors whose 16 members create a balance among health sectors and regions of Canada. The
Board provides strategic guidance to the Institute as well as the Health Statistics Division of Statistics Canada. In addition, the Board
maintains strong links with the Conference of Deputy Ministers of Health, advising them on health information matters.
MANDATE
CIHI’s mandate was established jointly by federal and provincial/territorial ministers of health:
•
•
to coordinate the development and maintenance of a comprehensive and integrated approach to health information in Canada;
and
to provide and coordinate the provision of accurate and timely data and information required for:
•
establishing sound health policy;
•
effectively managing the Canadian health system; and
•
generating public awareness about factors affecting good health.
CORE FUNCTIONS
The Institute’s core functions are to:
•
•
•
•
•
•
identify and promote national health indicators;
coordinate and promote the development and maintenance of national health information standards;
develop and manage health databases and registries;
conduct analysis and special studies and participate in research;
publish reports and disseminate health information; and
coordinate and conduct education sessions and conferences.
1
Contact Us for More Information About
ICD-10-CA and CCI
For questions related to the use of the classification or queries about its application, please visit our web site: www.cihi.ca and
register with our Online Coding Query Service or email or fax your query to us at - -
Classifications
Canadian Institute for Health Information
495 Richmond Road, Suite 600
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K2A 4H6
Fax: (613) 241-8120
Email: ccicd-10@cihi.ca
Web Site: www.cihi.ca (select "Coding/Classifications" then On-line Coding Query and follow the instructions)
For technical questions, not related to classification content or coding, please direct your questions by telephone to Newbook
Production Inc. 0900 to 1700 hours EST. 24-hour voice mail is available for both numbers.
Newbook Production Inc.
7045 Edwards Blvd. East, Suite 101
Mississauga, Ontario
L5S 1X2
Telephone: (800) 588-9334 x 32
Telephone: (905) 670-9997 x 32
Fax: (905) 670-9259
Email: info@newbook.com
Web Site: www.newbook.com
The ICD-10-CA/CCI CD-ROM may be ordered individually or they may be ordered from the CIHI Order Desk. The license limiting
the number of concurrent users may be extended through the e-order desk. To place an order, please visit our web site: www.cihi.ca,
mail, fax or email us at - -
CIHI Order Desk
495 Richmond Road, Suite 600
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K2A 4H6
Telephone: (613) 241-7860 ext. 4088
Fax: (613) 241-8120
Email: orderdesk@cihi.ca
Web Site: www.cihi.ca (select "Publications and Products" and follow the instructions)
3
Preface
ICD-10-CA is the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, Tenth Revision, Canada.
ICD-10-CA was developed by the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) in collaboration with an Expert Panel of
physicians, external field reviewers and the CIHI classification team. It is based on the World Health Organization (WHO) ICD-10
and is wholly comparable with this classification. ICD-10 is the official classification used for reporting mortality data in Canada.
ICD-10-CA is the classification recommended in most clinical settings. It is the national standard for reporting morbidity statistics.
CIHI has the responsibility to maintain ICD-10-CA. All enhancements, addenda and errata are only official when approved by CIHI.
5
Acknowledgements
ICD-10-CA and CCI are dedicated to the memory of Joady Murray who passed away October 24, 1999. As a member of the CIHI
classification team, Joady's enthusiasm, caring and desire to get it right was infused throughout her work on this project. She is
missed. We hope our labours meet her stringent expectations. The dream is now real. As she always said, "build on the past" and
we can make a better future.
ICD-10
The periodic revision of the ICD has, since the sixth revision in 1948, been coordinated by the World Health Organization. As the
use of the classification has increased, so, understandably, has the desire among users to contribute to the revision process. The
Tenth Revision is the product of a vast amount of international activity, cooperation and compromise. WHO acknowledges with
gratitude the contributions of the numerous international and national specialist groups and individuals in many countries.
The World Health Organization (WHO) gratefully acknowledges the important technical contribution of the WHO Collaborating
Centre for the Family of International Classifications which is located at the Deutsches Institut für Medizinische Dokumentation
und Information (DIMDI) in Cologne, Germany, and, in particular, that of the Head of the Centre Dr. med. Michael Schopen, in the
updating of the texts and the preparation of the electronic files that were used for this version of ICD-10.
ICD-10-CA
The modification of an international classification, such as ICD-10, to meet the exacting administrative, epidemiological and public
health research requirements of Canadians involves much collaboration. There were hundreds who gave of their time and energy.
Our thanks goes out to each individual contributor for the success of ICD-10-CA belongs to them. For a complete list of the original
contributors, please see the Acknowledgement's section in Version 2001 or contact CIHI at ccicd-10@cihi.ca.
National Implementation Advisory Committee (NIAC)
NIAC was established in 1997 by CIHI to coordinate federal, provincial and territorial implementation plans for ICD-10-CA and
CCI. NIAC functioned until 2003. The Committee was composed of a representative from each provincial and territorial Ministry
or Department of Health, Statistics Canada, Health Canada and CIHI. For a current list of members, please visit our web site:
www.cihi.ca, select Coding Classifications then Coding Structure and follow the links.
We also wish to thank the CIHI Classifications Advisory Committee and Health Canada for their contribution to the enhancement
of version 2006 of the ICD-10-CA.
The National ICD-10-CA/CCI Electronic Products Users Group is a subcommittee of NIAC. This committee shares experiences
and concerns with the use of ICD-10-CA and CCI electronic products. It provides recommendations to CIHI to enhance the
functionality of the ICD-10-CA and CCI electronic code books.
7
Introduction
Development of ICD-10
A classification of diseases may be defined as a system of categories to which morbid entities are assigned according to established
criteria. There are many possible axes of classification and the one selected will depend upon the use to be made of the statistics to
be compiled. A statistical classification of diseases must encompass the entire range of morbid conditions within a manageable
number of categories.
The Tenth Revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD-10) is the latest in
a series that was formalized in 1893 as the Bertillon Classification or International List of Causes of Death. A complete review of
the historical background to the classification is given in Volume 2 of ICD-10. While the title has been amended to make clearer
the content and purpose, and to reflect the progressive extension of the scope of the classification beyond diseases and injuries, the
familiar abbreviation "ICD" has been retained. In the updated classification, conditions have been grouped in a way that was felt to
be most suitable for general epidemiological purposes and the evaluation of health care.
Work on the Tenth Revision of the ICD started in September 1983 when a Preparatory Meeting on ICD-10 was convened in Geneva.
The programme of work was guided by regular meetings of Heads of World Health Organization (WHO) Collaborating Centres for
Classification of Diseases. Policy guidance was provided by a number of special meetings including those of the Expert Committee
on the International Classification of Disease - Tenth Revision, held in 1984 and 1987.
In addition to the technical contributions provided by many specialist groups and individual experts, a large number of comments
and suggestions were received from WHO Member States and Regional Offices as a result of the global circulation of draft
proposals for revision in 1984 and 1986. From the comments received, it was clear that many users wished the ICD to encompass
types of data other than the "diagnostic information" (in the broadest sense of the term) that it has always covered. In order to
accommodate the perceived needs of these users, the concept arose of a "family" of classifications centred on the traditional ICD
with its familiar form and structure. The ICD itself would thus meet the requirement for diagnostic information for general purposes,
while a variety of other classifications would be used in conjunction with it and would deal either with different approaches to the
same information or with different information (notably medical and surgical procedures and disablement).
Following suggestions, at the time of development of the Ninth Revision of the classification, that a different basic structure might
better serve the needs of the many and varied users, several alternative models were evaluated. It became clear, however, that the
traditional single-variable-axis design of the classification, and other aspects of its structure that gave emphasis to conditions that
were frequent, costly or otherwise of public health importance, had withstood the test of time and that many users would be unhappy
with any of the models that had been proposed as a possible replacement.
Consequently, as study of the Tenth Revision will show, the traditional ICD structure has been retained but an alphanumeric coding
scheme replaces the previous numeric one. This provides a larger coding frame and leaves room for future revision without
disruption of the numbering system, as has occurred at previous revisions.
In order to make optimum use of the available space, certain disorders of the immune mechanism are included with diseases of the
blood and blood-forming organs (Chapter III). New chapters have been created for diseases of the eye and adnexa and diseases of
the ear and mastoid process. The former supplementary classifications of external causes and of factors influencing health status
and contact with health services now form part of the main classification.
The dagger and asterisk system of dual classification for certain diagnostic statements, introduced in the Ninth Revision, has been
retained and extended, with the asterisk axis being contained in homogeneous categories at the three-character level.
Content of the three volumes of ICD-10
(This applies to the WHO version ICD-10. Note ICD-10-CA is limited to the tabular list and alphabetical index. The Canadian
Coding standards for ICD-10-CA and CCI incorporate WHO morbidity coding rules from Volume 2 of ICD-10.)
The presentation of the ICD-10 classification has been changed and there are now three volumes:
Volume 1. Tabular List. This contains the Report of the International Conference for the Tenth Revision, the classification itself
at the three- and four-character levels, the classification of the morphology of neoplasms, special tabulation lists for mortality and
morbidity, definitions, and the nomenclature regulations.
9
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Volume 2. Instruction Manual. This brings together the notes on certification and classification formerly included in Volume 1
with a good deal of new background and instructional matter and guidance on the use of Volume 1, on tabulations, and on planning
for the use of ICD, which was seen as lacking in earlier revisions. It also includes the historical material formerly presented in the
introduction to Volume 1.
Volume 3. Alphabetical Index. This presents the index itself with an introduction and expanded instructions on its use.
*
* *
The Forty-third World Health Assembly
The classification was approved by the International Conference for the Tenth Revision of the International Classification of
Diseases in 1989 and adopted by the Forty-third World Health Assembly in the following resolution:
Having considered the report of the International Conference for the Tenth Revision of the International Classification of Diseases;
1.
2.
3.
10
ADOPTS the following, recommended by the Conference:
(1) the detailed list of three-character categories and optional four-character subcategories with the Short Tabulation Lists for
Mortality and Morbidity, constituting the Tenth Revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and
Related Health Problems, due to come into effect on 1 January 1993;
(2) the definitions, standards and reporting requirements related to maternal, fetal, perinatal, neonatal and infant mortality;
(3) the rules and instructions for underlying cause coding for mortality and main condition coding for morbidity;
REQUESTS the Director-General to issue the Manual of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems;
ENDORSES the recommendations of the Conference concerning:
(1) the concept and implementation of the family of disease and health-related classifications, with the International
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems as the core classification surrounded by a number of
related and supplementary classifications and the International Nomenclature of Diseases;
(2) the establishment of an updating process within the ten-year revision cycle.
Updates
The official updates to the published volumes of ICD-10 are available as annual lists of changes on the WHO website for
classifications.
www.who.int/classifications
These updates are approved annually at the meeting of Heads of WHO Collaborating Centres for the Family of International
Classifications.
The lists indicate the sources of the recommendations and implementation dates.
The date of approval has been indicated for all changes except the corrigenda.
11
Conventions used in the Tabular List of Diseases
In listing terms in the tabular list, ICD-10-CA uses some special conventions relating to the use of parentheses, square brackets,
colons, braces, abbreviations and symbols. These need to be clearly understood by coders and others wishing to interpret statistics
based on ICD-10-CA.
Inclusion terms
Within the three and four-character rubrics, there are usually listed a number of other diagnostic terms. These are known as
"inclusion terms" and are given, in addition to the title, as examples of the diagnostic statements to be classified to that rubric. They
may refer to different conditions or be synonyms. They are not a subclassification of the rubric.
Inclusion terms are listed primarily as a guide to the content of the rubrics. Many of the items listed relate to important or common
terms belonging to the rubric. Others are borderline conditions or sites listed to distinguish the boundary between one subcategory
and another. The lists of inclusion terms are by no means exhaustive and alternative names of diagnostic entities are included in the
Alphabetical Index, which should be referred to first when coding a given diagnostic statement.
It is sometimes necessary to read inclusion terms in conjunction with titles. This usually occurs when the inclusion terms are
elaborating lists of sites or pharmaceutical products, where appropriate words from the titles (e.g. "malignant neoplasm of ...",
"injury to ...", "poisoning by ...") need to be understood.
General diagnostic descriptions common to a range of categories, or to all the subcategories in a three-character category, are to be
found in notes headed "Includes", immediately following a chapter, block or category title.
Exclusion terms
Certain rubrics contain lists of conditions preceded by the word "Excludes". These are terms which, although the rubric title might
suggest that they were to be classified there, are in fact classified elsewhere. An example of this is in category A46, "Erysipelas",
where postpartum or puerperal erysipelas is excluded. Following each excluded term, in parentheses, is the category or subcategory
code elsewhere in the classification to which the excluded term should be allocated.
General exclusions for a range of categories or for all subcategories in a three-character category are to be found in notes headed
"Excludes", immediately following a chapter, block or category title.
Glossary descriptions
In addition to inclusion or exclusion terms, Chapter V, Mental and behavioural disorders, uses glossary descriptions to indicate the
content of rubrics. This device is used because the terminology of mental disorders varies greatly, particularly between different
countries, and the same name may be used to describe quite different conditions. The glossary is not intended for use by coders.
Similar types of definitions are given elsewhere in ICD-10-CA, for example, Chapter XXI, to clarify the intended content of a
rubric.
Parentheses ()
Parentheses are used in the tabular list in four ways:
1. To enclose supplementary words, which may follow a diagnostic term without affecting the code number to which the words
  outside the parentheses would be assigned. For example, in I10 the inclusion term, "Hypertension (arterial) (benign) (essential)
 (malignant) (primary) (systemic)", implies that I10 is the code number for the word "Hypertension" alone or when qualified
by any one or combination, of the words in parentheses.
2. To enclose the code to which an exclusion term refers.
  e.g. H01.0, Blepharitis, excludes blepharoconjunctivitis (H10.5)
3. To enclose the three character codes of categories included in that block.
  e.g. Diseases of external ear (H60-H62)
4. To enclose the dagger code for an asterisk category and as asterisk code for a dagger category.
  e.g.
A74.0 Chlamydial conjunctivitis (H13.1*)
H13.1* Conjunctivitis in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
•
chlamydial (A74.0†)
13
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Square brackets [ ]
Square brackets are used in the tabular list in two ways:
1. For enclosing synonyms, alternative words or explanatory phrases,
  e.g. A30 Leprosy [Hansen's disease]
2. For referring to previous notes,
  e.g. C00.8 Overlapping lesion of lip [See note 5 at C00-D48 at beginning of Chapter II]
Colon :
A colon is used in listings of inclusion and exclusion terms when the words that precede it are not complete terms for assignment
to that rubric. They require one or more of the modifying or qualifying words indented under them before they can be assigned to
the rubric. For example, in K36, "Other appendicitis", the diagnosis "appendicitis" is to be classified there only if qualified by the
words "chronic" or "recurrent".
Brace }
A brace is used in listings of inclusion and exclusion terms to indicate that neither the words that precede it nor the words after it
are complete terms. Any of the terms before the brace should be qualified by one or more of the terms that follow it.
e.g.
O71.6
Obstetric damage to pelvic joints and ligaments
Avulsion of inner symphyseal cartilage
Damage to coccyx
obstetric
Traumatic separation of symphysis (pubis)
"NOS"
The letters NOS are an abbreviation for "not otherwise specified", implying "unspecified" or "unqualified".
Sometimes an unqualified term is nevertheless classified to a rubric for a more specific type of the condition. This is because, in
medical terminology, the most common form of a condition is often known by the name of the condition itself and only the less
common types are qualified. For example, "mitral stenosis" is commonly used to mean "rheumatic mitral stenosis". These inbuilt
assumptions have to be taken into account in order to avoid incorrect classification. Careful inspection of inclusion terms will reveal
where an assumption of cause has been made; coders should be careful not to code a term as unqualified unless it is quite clear that
no information is available that would permit a more specific assignment elsewhere. Similarly, in interpreting statistics based on
the ICD, some conditions assigned to an apparently specified category will not have been so specified on the record that was coded.
When comparing trends over time and interpreting statistics, it is important to be aware that assumptions may change from one
revision of the ICD to another. For example, before the Eighth Revision, an unqualified aortic aneurysm was assumed to be due to
syphilis.
"Not elsewhere classified"
The words "not elsewhere classified", when used in a three-character category title, serve as a warning that certain specified variants
of the listed conditions may appear in other parts of the classification. For example:
J16 Pneumonia due to other infectious organisms, not elsewhere classified
This category includes J16.0 Chlamydial pneumonia and J16.8 Pneumonia due to other specified infectious organisms. Many other
categories are provided in Chapter X (for example, J09-J15) and other chapters (for example, P23.- Congenital pneumonia) for
pneumonias due to specified infectious organisms. J18 Pneumonia, organism unspecified, accommodates pneumonias for which the
infectious agent is not stated.
"And" in titles
"And" stands for "and/or". For example, in the rubric A18.0, Tuberculosis of bones and joints, "tuberculosis of bones", "tuberculosis
of joints" and "tuberculosis of bones and joints" are all classified to this rubric.
14
CONVENTIONS — TABULAR LISTS
Point dash .-
In some cases, the fourth character of a subcategory code is replaced by a dash,
e.g.
G03 Meningitis due to other and unspecified causes,
Excludes: meningoencephalitis (G04.-)
This indicates that subsequent characters exist and should be sought in the appropriate category.
Symbols
† The dagger symbol is used to indicate a code that represents the etiology or underlying cause of a disease. A code representing
the manifestation of the disease should also be recorded. The dagger code should be sequenced before the manifestation code.
* The asterisk symbol is used to indicate a code that represents the manifestation of a disease. This code should be paired with a
dagger (etiology) code and should follow this in sequence.
The red maple leaf is used to indicate a code, which is not found in ICD-10 that has been added for use in Canada.
15
Basic Coding Guidelines
The following is a simple guide intended to assist the occasional user of ICD-10-CA to:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Identify the type of statement to be coded and refer to the appropriate section of the Alphabetical Index.
Locate the lead term. For diseases and injuries this is usually a noun for the pathological condition. However, some conditions
expressed as adjectives or eponyms are included in the Index as lead terms.
Read and be guided by any note that appears under the lead term.
Read any terms enclosed in parentheses after the lead term (these modifiers do not affect the code number), as well as any terms
indented under the lead term (these modifiers may affect the code number), until all the words in the diagnostic expression
have been accounted for.
Follow carefully any cross-references ("see" and "see also") found in the Index.
Refer to the tabular list to verify the suitability of the code number selected. It may be necessary to refer to all codes appearing
under the three-character level in order to identify the most appropriate code.
Be guided by any inclusion or exclusion terms under the selected code or under the chapter, block or category heading.
Assign the code.
17
WHO Collaborating Centres for the Family of
International Classifications
Nine WHO Collaborating Centres for Classification of Diseases have been established to assist countries with problems
encountered in the development and use of health-related classifications and, in particular, in the use of the ICD.
It is important that countries bring to the attention of the respective Centre any significant problems they might encounter in the use
of the ICD and especially when a new disease for which the ICD does not provide a suitable classification is encountered frequently.
Until now the ICD has not been updated between revisions but for ICD 10, through the Centres, a mechanism has been introduced
to provide suitable codes for new diseases where necessary.
In addition to the official WHO Collaborating Centres, there are a number of national reference centres and individual users should
first consult these, or their appropriate national office, when they encounter problems.
There are two Centres for English-language users. Communications should be addressed to the Head, WHO Collaborating Centre
for Classification of Diseases at:
Australian Institute of Health
GPO Box 570
Canberra, ACT 2601,
Australia
National Center for Health Statistics
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
3311 Toledo Road
Hyattsville, MD, 20782
United States of America
Canada is a member of the North American WHO Collaborating Centre for Classification of Diseases. Communications should be
directed to:
Classification Department
Canadian Institute for Health Information
495 Richmond Road Suite 600
Ottawa,, Ontario
K2A 4H6
Canada
The other seven centres, each based on an individual language or group of languages, are located in the following institutions:
Peking Union Medical College Hospital
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
No. 1 Shuaifuyuan, Dongcheng District
Beijing , 100730
China (for Chinese)
INSERM
44 Chemin de Ronde
F-78110
Le Vésinet, France (for French)
Department of Social Medicine
University Hospital
S-751 85
Uppsala, Sweden (for the Nordic countries)
19
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Faculdade de Saàode Publica/Universidade de Sà£o Paulo
Avenida Dr Arnaldo 715,
01246-904
Sao Paulo,SP, Brazil (for Portuguese)
National Research Institute of Public Health
12, Vorontsovo pole
105064
Moscow, Russian Federation (for Russian)
Centro Venezolano de Clasificacià3n de Enfermedades
Edificio Sur, 9o Piso
M.S.A.S.,
Centro Simon Bolivar,
P.O. Box 6653
Caracas, Venezuela (for Spanish)
German Institute of Medical Documentation and Information (DIMDI)
Waisenhausgasse 36-38A
50676
Köln, Germany (for German)
20
Report of the International Conference for the Tenth
Revision of the International Classification of Diseases
The International Conference for the Tenth Revision of the International Classification of Diseases was convened by the World
Health Organization at WHO headquarters in Geneva from 26 September to 2 October 1989. The Conference was attended by
delegates from 43 Member States:
Angola Luxembourg
Australia Madagascar
Bahamas Mali
Belgium Malta
Brazil Mozambique
Bulgaria Netherlands
Burundi Niger
Canada Portugal
China Republic of Korea
Cuba Senegal
Cyprus Singapore
Denmark Spain
Finland Sweden
France Switzerland
German Democratic Republic Thailand
Germany, Federal Republic of Uganda
Hungary Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
India United Arab Emirates
Indonesia United Kingdom of Great Britain
Israel and Northern Ireland
Japan United States of America
Kuwait Venezuela
The United Nations, the International Labour Organisation and the WHO Regional Offices sent representatives to participate in the
Conference, as did the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences, and twelve other nongovernmental
organizations concerned with cancer registration, the deaf, epidemiology, family medicine, gynaecology and obstetrics,
hypertension, health records, preventive and social medicine, neurology, psychiatry, rehabilitation and sexually transmitted
diseases.
The Conference was opened by Dr J.-P. Jardel, Assistant Director-General, on behalf of the Director-General. Dr Jardel spoke of
the extensive consultations and preparatory work that had gone into the revision proposals and had necessitated a longer than usual
interval between revisions. He noted that the Tenth Revision would have a new title, International Statistical Classification of
Diseases and Related Health Problems, to emphasize its statistical purpose and reflect the widening of its scope. The convenient
abbreviation ICD would, however, be retained. He also mentioned the new alphanumeric coding scheme, which had made it
possible to provide a better balance between the content of the chapters and to leave room for future additions and changes, as well
as the intention to produce an ICD manual of three-character categories with an alphabetical index for use where the more complex,
detailed four-character version would be inappropriate.
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
The Conference elected the following officers:
Dr R.H.C. Wells, Australia (Chairman)
Dr H. Bay-Nielsen, Denmark (Vice-Chairman)
Dr R. Braun, German Democratic Republic (Vice-Chairman)
Mr R.A. Israel, United States of America (Vice-Chairman)
Dr R. Laurenti, Brazil (Vice-Chairman)
Dr P. Maguin, France (Rapporteur)
Ms E. Taylor, Canada (Rapporteur)
The secretariat of the Conference was as follows:
Dr J.-P. Jardel, Assistant Director-General, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
Dr H.R. Hapsara, Director, Division of Epidemiological Surveillance and Health
                Situation and Trend Assessment, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
Dr J.-C. Alary, Chief Medical Officer, Development of Epidemiological and Health
               Statistical Services, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
Dr G.R. Brämer, Medical Officer, Development of Epidemiological and Health
                Statistical Services, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland (Secretary)
Mr A. L'Hours, Technical Officer, Development of Epidemiological and Health
              Statistical Services, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland
Professor W. Jänisch, German Democratic Republic (Temporary Adviser)
Mr T. Kruse, Denmark (Temporary Adviser)
Dr K. Kupka, France (Temporary Adviser)
Dr J. Leowski, Poland (Temporary Adviser)
Ms R.M. Loy, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
            (TemporaryAdviser)
Mr R.H. Seeman, United States of America (Temporary Adviser)
The secretariat of the Conference was assisted by representatives of other relevant technical units of WHO headquarters.
The Conference adopted an agenda dealing with the proposed content of the chapters of the Tenth Revision, and material to be
incorporated in the published manual; the process for its introduction; and the family of classifications and related matters.
1. History and development of uses of the InternationalClassification of Diseases (ICD)
The Conference was reminded of the impressive history of a statistical classification which dated back to the eighteenth century.
While early revisions of the classification had been concerned only with causes of death, its scope had been extended at the Sixth
Revision in 1948 to include non-fatal diseases. This extension had continued through the Ninth Revision, with certain innovations
being made to meet the statistical needs of widely differing organizations. In addition, at the International Conference for the Ninth
Revision (Geneva, 1975) (1), recommendations had been made and approved for the publication for trial purposes of supplementary
classifications of procedures in medicine and of impairments, disabilities, and handicaps.
22
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE REPORT
2. Review of activities in the preparation of proposalsfor the Tenth Revision of the ICD
The proposals before the Conference were the product of a vast amount of activity at WHO headquarters and around the world. The
programme of work had been guided by regular meetings of the heads of WHO Collaborating Centres for Classification of Diseases.
Policy guidance had been provided by a number of special meetings and by the Expert Committee on the International Classification
of Diseases - Tenth Revision, which met in 1984 (2) and 1987 (3) to make decisions on the direction the work should take and the
form of the final proposals.
Extensive preparatory activity had been devoted to a radical review of the suitability of the structure of the ICD, essentially a
statistical classification of diseases and other health problems, to serve a wide variety of needs for mortality and health-care data.
Ways of stabilizing the coding system to minimize disruption at successive revisions had been investigated, as had the possibility
of providing a better balance between the content of the different chapters of the ICD.
Even with a new structure, it was plain that one classification could not cope with the extremes of the requirements. The concept
had therefore been developed of a "family" of classifications, with the main ICD as the core, covering the centre ground of needs
for traditional mortality and morbidity statistics, while needs for more detailed, less detailed or different classifications and
associated matters would be dealt with by other members of the family.
Several alternative models for the structure of the ICD had been investigated by the Collaborating Centres, but it had been found
that each had unsatisfactory features and none had sufficient advantages over the existing structure to justify replacing it. Special
meetings held to evaluate the Ninth Revision had confirmed that, although some potential users found the existing structure of the
ICD unsuitable, there was a large body of satisfied users who considered it had many inherent strengths, whatever its apparent
inconsistencies, and wished it to continue in its existing form.
Various schemes involving alphanumeric notation had been examined with a view to producing a coding frame that would give a
better balance to the chapters and allow sufficient space for future additions and changes without disrupting the codes.
Decisions made on these matters had paved the way for the preparation of successive drafts of chapter proposals for the Tenth
Revision. These had twice been circulated to Member States for comment as well as being reviewed by other interested bodies,
meetings of Centre Heads, and the Expert Committee. A large number of international professional specialist associations,
individual specialists and experts, other WHO headquarters units and regional offices had given advice and guidance to the WHO
unit responsible for the ICD and to the Collaborating Centres on the preparation of the proposals and the associated material placed
before the Conference. WHO gratefully acknowledged this assistance.
3. General characteristics and content of the proposedTenth Revision of the ICD
The main innovation in the proposals for the Tenth Revision was the use of an alphanumeric coding scheme of one letter followed
by three numbers at the four-character level. This had the effect of more than doubling the size of the coding frame in comparison
with the Ninth Revision and enabled the vast majority of chapters to be assigned a unique letter or group of letters, each capable of
providing 100 three-character categories. Of the 26 available letters, 25 had been used, the letter U being left vacant for future
additions and changes and for possible interim classifications to solve difficulties arising at the national and international level
between revisions.
As a matter of policy, some three-character categories had been left vacant for future expansion and revision, the number varying
according to the chapters: those with a primarily anatomical axis of classification had fewer vacant categories as it was considered
that future changes in their content would be more limited in nature.
The Ninth Revision contained 17 chapters plus two supplementary classifications: the Supplementary Classification of External
Causes of Injury and Poisoning (the E code) and the Supplementary Classification of Factors Influencing Health Status and Contact
with Health Services (the V code). As recommended by the Preparatory Meeting on the Tenth Revision (Geneva, 1983) (4) and
endorsed by subsequent meetings, these two chapters were no longer considered to be supplementary but were included as a part of
the core classification.
The order of entry of chapters in the proposals for the Tenth Revision had originally been the same as in the Ninth Revision;
however, to make effective use of the available space, disorders of the immune mechanism were later included with diseases of the
blood and blood-forming organs, whereas in the Ninth Revision they had been included with endocrine, nutritional and metabolic
diseases. The new chapter on "Diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and certain disorders involving the immune
mechanism" now followed the "Neoplasms" chapter, with which it shared the letter D.
During the elaboration of early drafts of the chapter on "Diseases of the nervous system and sense organs", it had soon become clear
that it would not be possible to accommodate all the required detail under one letter in 100 three-character categories. It had been
decided, therefore, to create three separate chapters - "Diseases of the nervous system" having the letter G, and the two chapters on
"Diseases of the eye and adnexa" and on "Diseases of the ear and mastoid process" sharing the letter H.
23
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Also, the chapters on "Diseases of the genitourinary system", on "Pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium", on "Certain conditions
originating in the perinatal period, and on "Congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities" had been
brought together as contiguous chapters XIV to XVII.
With the inclusion of the former supplementary classifications as part of the core classification and the creation of two new chapters,
the total number of chapters in the proposal for the Tenth Revision had become 21. The titles of some chapters had been amended
to give a better indication of their content.
Where radical changes to the ICD had been proposed, field-testing had been appropriate. This had been the case for the following
chapters:
V.
Mental and behavioural disorders
XIX. Injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of externalcauses
XX.
External causes of morbidity and mortality
Chapter II, "Neoplasms", had also been subject to some field-testing, although the changes in its content had been of a minor nature.
Some new features of the proposals for the Tenth Revision were as follows:
•
•
•
•
The exclusion notes at the beginning of each chapter had been expanded to explain the relative hierarchy of chapters, and to
make it clear that the "special group" chapters had priority of assignment over the organ or system chapters and that, among
the special group chapters, those on "Pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium" and on "Certain conditions originating in the
perinatal period" had priority over the others.
Also, at the beginning of each chapter an overview was given of the blocks of three-character categories and, where relevant,
the asterisk categories; this had been done to clarify the structure of the chapters and to facilitate the use of the asterisk
categories.
The notes in the tabular list applied to all uses of the classification; if a note was appropriate only to morbidity or only to
mortality, it was included in the special notes accompanying either the morbidity coding rules or the mortality coding rules.
The Ninth Revision had identified a certain number of conditions as being drug-induced; this approach had been continued in
drawing up the proposals for the Tenth Revision and many such conditions were now separately identified.
An important innovation was the creation towards the end of certain chapters of categories for postprocedural disorders. These
identified important conditions that constituted a medical care problem in their own right and included such examples as endocrine
and metabolic diseases following ablation of an organ and other specific conditions such as postgastrectomy dumping syndrome.
Postprocedural conditions that were not specific to a particular body system, including immediate complications such as air
embolism and postoperative shock, continued to be classified in the chapter on "Injury, poisoning and certain other consequences
of external causes".
Another change was that in the Ninth Revision, the four-digit titles had often had to be read in conjunction with the three-digit titles
to ascertain the full meaning and intent of the subcategory, whereas in the draft presented to the Conference the titles were almost
invariably complete and could stand alone.
The dual classification scheme for etiology and manifestation, known as the dagger and asterisk system, introduced in the Ninth
Revision, had been the subject of a certain amount of criticism. This related mainly to the fact that the classification frequently
contained a mixture of manifestation and other information at the three- and four-digit levels, with the same diagnostic labels
sometimes appearing under both axes. Also, many considered the system to be insufficiently comprehensive. To overcome these
problems, in the draft for the Tenth Revision, the asterisk information was contained in 82 homogeneous three-character categories
for optional use. This approach enabled those diagnostic statements containing information about both a generalized underlying
disease process and a manifestation or complication in a particular organ or site to receive two codes, allowing retrieval or tabulation
according to either axis.
These characteristics of the proposed Tenth Revision were accepted by the Conference.
Each of the chapters was introduced to the Conference with a presentation on changes introduced since the Ninth Revision and some
background information about certain innovations. Some issues related to changes in chapter structure and content were discussed
by the Conference and agreement reached on follow-up and modification by the secretariat.
4.Standards and definitions related to maternal and childhealth
The Conference considered with interest the recommended definitions, standards and reporting requirements for the Tenth Revision
with regard to maternal mortality and to fetal, perinatal, neonatal and infant mortality. These recommendations were the outcome
of a series of special meetings and consultations and were directed towards improving the comparability of data.
The Conference agreed that it was desirable to retain the definitions of live birth and fetal death as they appeared in the Ninth
Revision.
24
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE REPORT
After some discussion, the Conference set up a working party on the subject of maternal mortality and, on the basis of its
recommendations, also agreed to retain the definition of maternal death as it appeared in the Ninth Revision.
In order to improve the quality of maternal mortality data and provide alternative methods of collecting data on deaths during
pregnancy or related to it, as well as to encourage the recording of deaths from obstetric causes occurring more than 42 days
following termination of pregnancy, two additional definitions, for "pregnancy-related deaths" and "late maternal deaths", were
formulated by the working party. [These are included on page 1238, Vol 1, ICD-10.]
The Conference
RECOMMENDED that countries consider the inclusion on deathcertificates of questions regarding current pregnancy and preg-
nancy within oneyear preceding death.
The Conference agreed that, since the number of live births was more universally available than the number of total births (live
births plus fetal deaths), it should be used as the denominator in the ratios related to maternal mortality.
With respect to perinatal, neonatal and infant mortality, it was strongly advised that published rates based on birth cohorts should
be so identified and differentiated.
The Conference confirmed the practice of expressing age in completed units of time and thus designating the first day of life as day
zero.
The conference
RECOMMENDED the inclusion, in the manual of the Tenth Revisionof the ICD, of definitions, standards and reporting require-
ments related tomaternal mortality and to fetal, perinatal, neonatal and infant mortality.
5. Coding and selection rules and tabulation lists
5.1 Coding and selection rules for mortality
The Conference was informed about a process for review of the selection and modification rules for underlying cause of death and
the associated notes, as they appeared in the Ninth Revision, which had resulted in several recommended changes in the rules and
extensive changes to the notes.
The Conference
RECOMMENDED that the rules for selection of cause of death for primary mortality tabulation, as they appear in the Ninth
Revision, be replaced in the Tenth Revision.
The Conference was further informed that additional notes for use in underlying cause coding and the interpretation of entries of
causes of death had been drafted and were being reviewed. As these notes were intended to improve consistency in coding, the
Conference agreed that they would also be incorporated in the Tenth Revision.
The Conference noted the continued use of multiple-condition coding and analysis in relation to causes of death. It expressed
encouragement for such activities, but did not recommend that the Tenth Revision should contain any particular rules or methods
of analysis to be followed.
In considering the international form of medical certificate of cause of death, the Expert Committee had recognized that the situation
of an aging population with a greater proportion of deaths involving multiple disease processes, and the effects of associated
therapeutic interventions, tended to increase the number of possible statements between the underlying cause and the direct cause
of death: this meant that an increasing number of conditions were being entered on death certificates in many countries. This led
the Committee to recommend the inclusion of an additional line (d) in Part I of the certificate.
The Conference therefore
RECOMMENDED that, where a need has been identified, countries consider the possibility of including an additional line (d)
in Part I of the medical certificate of cause of death.
25
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
5.2 Coding and selection rules for morbidity
For the first time, the Ninth Revision contained guidance on recording and coding for morbidity and specifically for the selection
of a single condition for presentation of morbidity statistics. Experience gained in the use of the definitions and rules in the Ninth
Revision had proved their usefulness and generated requests for their clarification, for further elaboration regarding the recording
of diagnostic information by health care practitioners, and for more guidance on dealing with specific problem situations.
The Conference endorsed the recommendations of the 1975 Revision Conference about the condition to be selected for single-
condition analysis of episodes of health care, and its view that, where practicable, multiple-condition coding and analysis should be
undertaken to supplement routine statistics. It stressed that the Tenth Revision should make it clear that much of the guidance was
applicable only when the tabulation of a "main condition" for an episode was appropriate and when the concept of an "episode" per
se was relevant to the way in which data collection was organized.
The Conference accordingly
RECOMMENDED that additional guidance on the recording and coding of morbidity should be included in the Tenth Revision,
and that the definitions of "main condition" and "other conditions" should be incorporated, together with the modified rules for
dealing with obviously incorrectly reported "main condition".
The Conference also
RECOMMENDED that where the "main condition" is subject to the dual classification system provided in the ICD, both the dag-
ger and asterisk codes should be recorded, to permit alternative tabulation by either.
The Conference agreed that extensive notes and examples should be added to provide further assistance.
5.3 Lists for tabulation of mortality and morbidity
The Conference was informed about difficulties that had arisen in the use of the Basic Tabulation List based on the Ninth Revision
and about the activities that had been undertaken, particularly by WHO, to develop new lists for the tabulation and publication of
mortality data. In this process it had become apparent that, in many countries, mortality up to the age of five was a more robust
indicator than infant mortality, and that it would therefore be preferable to have a list that included infant deaths and deaths of
children up to the age of five years, rather than a list for infants only.
Two versions of the general mortality list and of the infant and child mortality list had been prepared for consideration by the
Conference, with the second version including chapter titles and residual items for chapters as necessary.
As some concerns were expressed regarding the mortality lists as presented, a small working party was convened to consider the
possible inclusion of some additional items. The report of the working party was accepted by the Conference and is reflected in the
mortality lists on pages 1207-1220.
On the topic of lists for the tabulation of morbidity, the Conference reviewed both a proposed tabulation list and a model publication
list based on chapter titles, with selected items included as examples under each title. Considerable concern was expressed about
the applicability of such lists to all morbidity in the broadest sense. There was general agreement that the lists as presented were
probably more suited to inpatient morbidity, and it was felt that further efforts should be made to develop lists suitable for other
morbidity applications and also that both mortality and morbidity tabulation lists should be accompanied in the Tenth Revision by
appropriate explanations and instructions on their use.
In the light of the concerns raised in the Conference and the conclusions of the working party, the Conference agreed that the
tabulation and publication lists should appear in the Tenth Revision, while an effort should be made to establish clearer, more
descriptive titles for these lists. It was also agreed that, to facilitate the alternative tabulation of asterisk categories, a second version
of the morbidity tabulation list should be developed, which included the asterisk categories.
6. Family of classifications
6.1 Concept of the family of classifications
During the preparation of the Ninth Revision it had already been realized that the ICD alone could not cover all the information
required and that only a "family" of disease and health-related classifications would meet the different requirements in public health.
Since the late 1970s, therefore, various possible solutions had been envisaged, one of which called for a core classification (ICD)
with a series of modules, some hierarchically related and others of a supplementary nature.
After studies and discussions in cooperation with the various Collaborating Centres, a concept of a family of classifications had
been elaborated and subsequently revised by the Expert Committee in 1987, which had recommended the scheme shown opposite.
26
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE REPORT
The Conference
RECOMMENDED that the concept of the family of disease and health-related classifications should be followed up by WHO.
In order to maintain the integrity of the ICD itself and this family concept, the Conference
RECOMMENDED that, in the interests of international comparability, no changes should be made to the content (as indicated
by the titles) of the three-character categories and four-character sub-categories of the Tenth Revision in the preparation of
translations or adaptations, except as authorized by WHO. The Secretariat of WHO is responsible for the ICD and acts as central
clearing-house for any publication (except national statistical publications) or translation to be derived from it. WHO should be
promptly notified about the intention to produce translations and adaptations or other ICD-related classifications.
Family of disease and health-related classifications
27
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
The Conference viewed with interest a presentation of the use and linkage of different members of the ICD family in the
medicosocial and multidimensional assessment of the elderly in relation not only to health but also to activities of daily living as
well as the social and physical environment. It was demonstrated that effective information could be obtained through use of the
ICD and the International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities, and Handicaps (ICIDH), and especially through use of the
codes from the proposed Chapter XXI of the Tenth Revision.
6.2 Specialty-based adaptations
The Conference was informed about plans for the development of adaptations of the Tenth Revision in the mental health programme
area. Clinical guidelines would accompany a version intended for use by clinicians working in the field of psychiatry; research
criteria would be proposed for use in investigations of mental health problems; and multi-axial presentations for use in dealing with
childhood disorders and for the classification of adult problems would be developed as well as a version for use by general
practitioners. Compilations of ICD codes relevant to psychiatry and to neurology would also be produced along the lines of previous
publications on this subject.
The Conference also heard about the methods used to ensure that the basic structure and function of the ICD were preserved in the
initial development of the application for medical specialists in dentistry and stomatology (ICD-DA) and was informed that a new
revision of the ICD-DA linked to the Tenth Revision was in the final stages of preparation.
A presentation was given on the International Classification of Diseases for Oncology (ICD-O), Second Edition, a multi-axial
classification including both the topography and morphology of neoplasms. The morphology codes of the ICD-O, which had
evolved over a long period of time, had been revised and extensively field-tested. The topography codes of the second edition would
be based on categories C00-C80 in the Tenth Revision and publication would, therefore, await World Health Assembly approval of
the Tenth Revision.
There was agreement on the value of an adaptation in the area of general medical practice and the Conference was informed about
the willingness of groups working in this area to collaborate with WHO. In respect of other specialty-based adaptations, which were
likely to become more numerous, the recommended role of WHO as a clearing-house was considered to be extremely important.
6.3 Information support to primary health care
In accordance with the recommendations of the 1975 Revision Conference, a working group had been convened by the WHO
Regional Office for South-East Asia in Delhi in 1976. It had drawn up a detailed list of symptom associations, and from this, two
short lists were derived, one for causes of death and one for reasons for contact with health services. Field trials of this system had
been carried out in countries of the Region and the results used to revise the list of symptom associations and the reporting forms.
This revised version had been published by WHO in 1978 in the booklet Lay reporting of health information (5).
The Global Strategy for Health for All by the Year 2000, launched in 1978, had raised a number of challenges for the development
of information systems in Member States. At the International Conference on Health Statistics for the Year 2000 (Bellagio, Italy,
1982) (6), the integration of "lay reporting" information with other information generated and used for health management purposes
had been identified as a major problem inhibiting the wider implementation of lay reporting schemes. The Consultation on Primary
Care Classifications (Geneva, 1985) (7) had stressed the need for an approach that could unify information support, health service
management and community services through information based on lay reporting in the expanded sense of community-based
information.
The Conference was informed about the experience of countries in developing and applying community-based health information
that covered health problems and needs, related risk factors and resources. It supported the concept of developing non-conventional
methods at the community level as a method of filling information gaps in individual countries and strengthening their information
systems. It was stressed that, for both developed and developing countries, such methods or systems should be developed locally
and that, because of factors such as morbidity patterns as well as language and cultural variations, transfer to other areas or countries
should not be attempted.
6.4 Impairments, disabilities and handicaps
The International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities, and Handicaps (ICIDH) (8) had been published by WHO in English
in 1980 for trial purposes, in accordance with the recommendations of the 1975 Revision Conference and resolution WHA29.35 (9)
of the 1976 World Health Assembly. Since that time, research and development on the classification had followed a number of
paths.
The major definitions of the three elements - impairment, disability and handicap - had undoubtedly been instrumental in changing
attitudes to disablement. The definition of impairment, an area where there was considerable overlap with the terms included in the
ICD, had been widely accepted. The definition of disability broadly matched the field of action of rehabilitation professionals and
groups, although there was felt to be a need for more attention in the associated code to the gradation of severity, which was often
a predictor of handicap. There had also been increasing requests to revise the definition of handicap so as to put more emphasis on
the effect of interaction with the environment.
28
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE REPORT
The rapid evolution of ideas and practices in the management of disablement had ruled out the production of a revised ICIDH in
time to be submitted to the Conference. It was stated that the publication of a new version was unlikely before implementation of
the Tenth Revision.
6.5 Procedures in medicine
The International Classification of Procedures in Medicine (ICPM) (10) had been published by WHO in 1978 for trial purposes, in
accordance with the recommendations of the 1975 Revision Conference and resolution WHA29.35 (9) of the 1976 World Health
Assembly. The classification had been adopted by a few countries and was used as a basis for national classifications of surgical
operations by a number of other countries.
The Heads of WHO Collaborating Centres for Classification of Diseases had recognized that the process of drafting proposals,
obtaining comments, redrafting and soliciting further comments, which WHO necessarily had to go through before finalization and
publication, was inappropriate in such a rapidly advancing field as that of procedures. The Centre Heads had therefore
recommended that there should be no revision of the ICPM in conjunction with the Tenth Revision of ICD.
In 1987 the Expert Committee had asked that WHO consider updating for the Tenth Revision at least the outline of Chapter 5,
"Surgical procedures", of the trial ICPM. In response to this request and the needs expressed by a number of countries, an attempt
had been made by the Secretariat to prepare a tabulation list for procedures.
This list had been presented to the Centre Heads at their 1989 meeting and it had been agreed that it could serve as a guide for
national presentation or publication of statistics on surgical procedures and could also facilitate intercountry comparisons. The aim
of the list was to identify procedures and groups of procedures and define them as a basis for the development of national
classifications, thereby improving the comparability of such classifications.
The Conference agreed that such a list was of value and that work should continue on its development, even though any publication
would follow the implementation of the Tenth Revision.
6.6 International Nomenclature of Diseases
Since 1970 the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) had been involved in the preparation of an
International Nomenclature of Diseases (IND) which would serve as a complement to the ICD.
The main purpose of the IND was to provide a single recommended name for every disease entity. The main criteria for selection
of that name were that it should be specific, unambiguous, as self- descriptive and simple as possible, and based on cause wherever
feasible. Each disease or syndrome for which a name was recommended was defined as unambiguously, and yet briefly, as possible.
A list of synonyms was appended to each definition.
At the time of the Conference, volumes had been published on diseases of the lower respiratory tract, infectious diseases (viral,
bacterial and parasitic diseases and mycoses) and cardiac and vascular diseases, and work was under way on volumes for the
digestive system, female genital system, urinary and male genital system, metabolic and endocrine diseases, blood and blood-
forming organs, immunological system, musculoskeletal system and nervous system. Subjects proposed for future volumes
included psychiatric diseases, as well as diseases of the skin, ear, nose and throat, and eye and adnexa.
The Conference recognized that an authoritative, up-to-date and international nomenclature of diseases was important in developing
the ICD and improving the comparability of health information. The Conference therefore
RECOMMENDED that WHO and CIOMS be encouraged to explore cost-efficient ways to achieve the timely completion and
maintenance of such a nomenclature.
7. Implementation of the Tenth Revision of the ICD
The Conference was informed of WHO's intention to publish the detailed four-character version of the Tenth Revisionof ICD-10 in
three volumes: one containing the Tabular List, a second containing all related definitions, standards, rules and instructions, and a
third containing the Alphabetical Index.
The Conference was further informed that a three-character version of the Tenth Revision would be published as a single volume
which would contain, in the Tabular List, all inclusion and exclusion notes. It would also contain all related definitions, standards,
rules and instructions and a shortened Alphabetical Index.
Member States intending to produce national language versions of the Tenth Revision should notify WHO of their intentions.
Copies of the drafts of the ICD at the three- and four-character levels would be made available from WHO both in printed form and
on electronic media.
With respect to the physical appearance of the pages and type formats for both the Tabular List and the Alphabetical Index, the
Conference was assured that recommendations from the Centre Heads and complaints from coders would be considered, and every
attempt made to improve those aspects as compared with the Ninth Revision.
29
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
As with the Ninth Revision, it was intended to develop materials for the reorientation of trained coders, with the help of the
Collaborating Centres. The actual training courses would be the responsibility of the WHO regional offices and individual countries.
They would be carried out from late 1991 to the end of 1992, to finish before the implementation of the Tenth Revision.
Materials for the basic training of new users of the ICD would also be developed by WHO; it was not, however, planned to begin
courses before 1993.
As noted above, WHO would be prepared to provide the Tenth Revision (both the Tabular List and the Alphabetical Index) on
electronic media. In future, with the assistance of the Collaborating Centres, other software might also be made available. A key for
conversion from the Ninth to the Tenth Revision, and the reverse, should be available before the implementation of the Tenth
Revision.
As the development activities that had been endorsed by the Expert Committee were on schedule, the Conference
RECOMMENDED that the Tenth Revision of the InternationalClassification of Diseases should come into effect as from 1 Jan-
uary 1993.
8. Future revision of the ICD
The Conference discussed the difficulties experienced during the extended period of use of the Ninth Revision, related to the
emergence of new diseases and the lack of an updating mechanism to accommodate them.
Various suggestions for mechanisms to overcome these difficulties and avoid similar problems with respect to the Tenth Revision
were discussed. There was a clear feeling that there was a need for ongoing information exchange to standardize the use of the Tenth
Revision between countries, but that any changes introduced during its "lifetime" should be considered very carefully in relation to
their impact on analyses and trends. There was discussion on the type of forum in which such changes and the potential for use of
the vacant letter "U" in new or temporary code assignments could be discussed. It was agreed that it would not be feasible to hold
revision conferences more frequently than every 10 years.
On the basis of the needs expressed, and the fact that it would be inappropriate to attempt to determine or define the exact process
to be used, the Conference
RECOMMENDED that the next International Revision Conferenceshould take place in ten years' time, and that WHO should
endorse the conceptof an updating process between revisions and give consideration as to how aneffective updating mechanism
could be put in place.
9. Adoption of the Tenth Revision of the ICD
The Conference made the following recommendation:
Having considered the proposals prepared by the Organization on the basis of the recommendations of the Expert Committee on the
International Classification of Diseases - Tenth Revision,
Recognizing the need for a few further minor modifications to reflect the comments on points of detail submitted by Member States
during the Conference,
RECOMMENDED that the proposed revised chapters, with theirthree-character categories and four-character subcategories
and the ShortTabulation Lists for Morbidity and Mortality, constitute the Tenth Revision ofthe International Statistical Classifi-
cation of Diseases and Related HealthProblems.
References
1.
2.
International Classification of Diseases, 1975 Revision, Volume 1. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1977, pp. xiii-xxiv.
Report of the Expert Committee on the International Classification of Diseases - 10th Revision: First Meeting. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 1984 (unpublished document DES/EC/ICD-10/84.34).
3. Report of the Expert Committee on the International Classification of Diseases - 10th Revision: Second Meeting. Geneva,
World Health Organization. 1987 (unpublished document WHO/DES/EC/ICD-10/87.38).
4. Report of the Prelistitemtory Meeting on ICD-10. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1983 (unpublished document DES/
ICD-10/83.19).
5. Lay reporting of health information. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1978.
6. International Conference on Health Statistics for the Year 2000. Budapest, Statistical Publishing House, 1984.
7. Report of the Consultation on Primary Care Classifications. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1985 (unpublished document
DES/PHC/85.7).
8. International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities, and Handicaps. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1980.
9. WHO Official Records, No. 233, 1976, p. 18.
10. International Classification of Procedures in Medicine. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1978.
30
Maintenance and Development of ICD-10-CA
Enhancements
CIHI is responsible for maintaining and updating ICD-10-CA to ensure the continued relevancy and utility of ICD-10-CA and to
reflect Canadian practice patterns. The World Health Organization (WHO) plans to release ICD-10 updates on a three year cycle.
For further information on the updating process please visit www.cihi.ca/Coding and Classifications.
To ensure that international comparability is maintained, the enhancements are made based upon the following guiding principles:
1.
2.
3.
Consistency with the purpose and scope of the classification
Consistency with the WHO rules and guidelines, and adherence to the structure/presentation of ICD-10
Inclusive of detail clinically meaningful in Canada
The WHO reviews the Canadian enhancements as part of our sub-license agreement.
Significant changes introduced in ICD-10 and maintained as the basis for ICD-10-CA, include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Change of title
Alphanumeric coding scheme
Four new chapters
Reordering of chapters
Relocation of diseases and conditions
Change of axis for land transport accidents
Grouping injuries by body region
Creation of categories for postprocedural disorders
Terminology change to "sequelae" from "late effects"
ICD-10-CA includes the addition of fifth and sixth characters to provide added specificity.
ICD-10-CA also includes two additional chapters in the tabular list. The Morphology of neoplasms is incorporated as Chapter XXII.
Chapter XXIII captures provisional codes for research and temporary assignment. Chapter XXIII covers the letter "U" which was
unassigned by the WHO. As the title implies, classification of diseases or conditions, this chapter is intended to be temporary. As
further information becomes available, these codes will be reassigned to the main body of the classification.
In keeping with ICD-10 (WHO version) ICD-10-CA uses American spelling conventions in the alphabetical index and British
spelling conventions in the tabular listing.
31
Conventions used in the Alphabetical Index
Parentheses
In the Index, as in the Tabular List, parentheses have a special meaning. A term that is followed by other terms in parentheses is
classified to the given code number whether any of the terms in parentheses are reported or not. For example:
Abscess (embolic) (infective) (metastatic) (multiple) (pyogenic) (septic) brain (any part) G06.0
Brain abscess is classified to G06.0 regardless of the part of the organ affected and whether or not the abscess is described as
embolic, infective, metastatic, multiple, pyogenic, or septic.
Cross-references
Some categories, particularly those subject to notes linking them with other categories, require rather complex indexing
arrangements. To avoid repeating this arrangement for each of the inclusion terms involved, a cross-reference is used. This may
take a number of forms, as in the following examples:
Inflammation
- bone - see Osteomyelitis
This indicates that the term "Inflammation, bone" is to be coded in the same way as the term "Osteomyelitis". On looking up the
latter term, the coder will find listed various forms of osteomyelitis: acute, acute hematogenous, chronic, etc.
When a term has a number of modifiers which might be listed beneath more than one term, the cross-reference (see also ...) is used.
Paralysis
- shaking (see also Parkinsonism) G20)
If the term "shaking paralysis" is the only term on the medical record, the code number is G20, but if any other information is present
which is not found indented below, then reference should be made to "Parkinsonism". There alternative codes will be found for the
condition if further or otherwise qualified as, for example, due to drugs or syphilitic.
Enlargement, enlarged - see also Hypertrophy
If the site for enlargement is not found among the indentations beneath "Enlargement", the indentations beneath "Hypertrophy"
should be referred to, where a more complete list of sites is given.
Bladder - see condition
Hereditary - see condition
As stated previously, anatomical sites and very general adjectival modifiers are not usually used as lead terms in the Index and one
is instructed to look up the disease or injury reported on the medical record and under that term to find the site or adjectival modifier.
Abdomen, abdominal - see also condition
- acute R10.0
- convulsive equivalent G40.8
- muscle deficiency syndrome Q79.4
The term "acute abdomen" is coded to R10.0; "abdominal convulsive equivalent" is coded to G40.8; and "abdominal muscle
deficiency syndrome" is coded to Q79.4. For other abdominal conditions, one should look up the disease or injury reported.
33
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Abbreviation NEC
The letters NEC stand for "not elsewhere classified". They are added after terms classified to residual or unspecific categories and
to terms in themselves ill defined as a warning that specified forms of the conditions are classified differently. If the medical record
includes more precise information the coding should be modified accordingly, e.g.
Anomaly, anomalous (congenital) (unspecified type) Q89.9
aorta (arch) NEC Q25.4
The term "anomaly of aorta" is classified to Q25.4 only if no more precise description appears on the medical record. If a more
precise term, e.g. atresia or aorta, is recorded, this term should be looked up for the appropriate code.
Special signs
The following special signs will be found attached to certain code numbers or index terms:
†/* Dagger and asterisk used to designate the etiology code and the manifestation code respectively, for terms subject to dual
classification.
# Attached to certain terms in the list of sites under "Neoplasm" to refer the coder to Notes 2 and 3, respectively, at the start of that
list.
34
Diagrams in ICD-10-CA
Percentage of body surface burned - adult
35
Percentage of body surface burned - child
36
Ankle Fractures
37
38
Tabular list of inclusions and
four-character subcategories
I
CHAPTER I
Certain infectious and parasitic diseases
(A00-B99)
Note:
Use additional code to identify resistance to antimicrobial and antineoplastic drugs (U82-U85)
Includes:
diseases generally recognized as communicable or transmissible
carrier infectious disease (Z22.-)
certain localized infections
influenza and infections (J00-J22)
Excludes:
carrier or suspected carrier of infectious disease (Z22.-)
certain localized infections - see body system-related chapters
infectious and parasitic diseases:
•
complicating pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium [except obstetrical tetanus] (O98.-)
•
specific to the perinatal period [except tetanus neonatorum, congenital syphilis, perinatal gonococcal infection
and perinatal human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease] (P35-P39)
influenza and other acute respiratory infections (J00-J22)
This Chapter contains the following blocks:
A00-A09
A15-A19
A20-A28
A30-A49
A50-A64
A65-A69
A70-A74
A75-A79
A80-A89
A90-A99
B00-B09
B15-B19
B24-B24
B25-B34
B35-B49
B50-B64
B65-B83
B85-B89
B90-B94
B95-B97
B99-B99
Intestinal infectious diseases
Tuberculosis
Certain zoonotic bacterial diseases
Other bacterial diseases
Infections with a predominantly sexual mode of transmission
Other spirochaetal diseases
Other diseases caused by chlamydiae
Rickettsioses
Viral infections of the central nervous system
Arthropod-borne viral fevers and viral haemorrhagic fevers
Viral infections characterized by skin and mucous membrane lesions
Viral hepatitis
Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease
Other viral diseases
Mycoses
Protozoal diseases
Helminthiases
Pediculosis, acariasis and other infestations
Sequelae of infectious and parasitic diseases
Bacterial, viral and other infectious agents
Other infectious diseases
41
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A00
Intestinal infectious diseases
(A00-A09)
Includes:
A00
carrier or suspected carrier of infectious disease Z22
certain localized infections - see body system-related chapters
infectious and parasitic diseases:
•
complicating pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium
•
specific to the perinatal period [except tetanus neonatorum
influenza and other acute respiratory infections
Cholera
A00.0 Cholera due to Vibrio cholerae 01, biovar cholerae
     Includes:
    Classical cholera
A00.1 Cholera due to Vibrio cholerae 01, biovar eltor
     Includes:
    Cholera eltor
A00.9 Cholera, unspecified
A01
Typhoid and paratyphoid fevers
A01.0 Typhoid fever
     Includes:
    Infection due to Salmonella typhi
A01.1 Paratyphoid fever A
A01.2 Paratyphoid fever B
A01.3 Paratyphoid fever C
A01.4 Paratyphoid fever, unspecified
     Includes:
    Infection due to Salmonella paratyphi NOS
A02
Other salmonella infections
Includes:
infection or foodborne intoxication due to any Salmonella species other than S. typhi and S.
paratyphi
A02.0 Salmonella enteritis
     Includes:
    Salmonellosis
A02.1 Salmonella sepsis
A02.2† Localized salmonella infections
        Includes:
       Salmonella:
      •
       arthritis † (M01.3*)
        •
         meningitis † (G01*)
          •
           osteomyelitis † (M90.2*)
            •
             pneumonia † (J17.0*)
              •
               renal tubulo-interstitial disease † (N16.0*)
A02.8 Other specified salmonella infections
A02.9 Salmonella infection, unspecified
A03
Shigellosis
A03.0 Shigellosis due to Shigella dysenteriae
     Includes:
    Group A shigellosis [Shiga-Kruse dysentery]
A03.1 Shigellosis due to Shigella flexneri
     Includes:
    Group B shigellosis
A03.2 Shigellosis due to Shigella boydii
     Includes:
    Group C shigellosis
42
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
A03.3 Shigellosis due to Shigella sonnei
     Includes:
    Group D shigellosis
A03.8 Other shigellosis
A03.9 Shigellosis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Bacillary dysentery NOS
A04
A05.9
Other bacterial intestinal infections
Excludes:
foodborne intoxications, elsewhere classified(A05.-)
tuberculous enteritis (A18.3)
A04.0 Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli infection
A04.1 Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli infection
A04.2 Enteroinvasive Escherichia coli infection
A04.3 Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli infection
A04.4 Other intestinal Escherichia coli infections
     Includes:
    Escherichia coli enteritis NOS
A04.5 Campylobacter enteritis
A04.6 Enteritis due to Yersinia enterocolitica
     Excludes:
    extraintestinal yersiniosis (A28.2)
A04.7 Enterocolitis due to Clostridium difficile
     Includes:
    Foodborne intoxication by Clostridium difficile
   Pseudomembranous colitis
  Use additional code to identify resistance to antimicrobial and antineoplastic drugs (U82-U85)
A04.8 Other specified bacterial intestinal infections
A04.9 Bacterial intestinal infection, unspecified
     Includes:
    Bacterial enteritis NOS
A05
Other bacterial foodborne intoxications, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
Escherichia coli infection (A04.0-A04.4)
listeriosis (A32.-)
salmonella foodborne intoxication and infection (A02.-)
toxic effect of noxious foodstuffs (T61-T62)
A05.0 Foodborne staphylococcal intoxication
A05.1 Botulism
     Includes:
A05.2 Foodborne Clostridium perfringens [Clostridium welchii] intoxication
     Includes:
    Enteritis necroticans
   Pig-bel
A05.3 Foodborne Vibrio parahaemolyticus intoxication
A05.4 Foodborne Bacillus cereus intoxication
A05.8 Other specified bacterial foodborne intoxications
A05.80o Foodborne Vibrio vulnificus intoxication
A05.88o Other specified bacterial foodborne intoxications
A05.9 Bacterial foodborne intoxication, unspecified
Classical foodborne intoxication due to Clostridium botulinum
43
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A06
Amoebiasis
Includes:
Excludes:
A06
infection due to Entamoeba histolytica
other protozoal intestinal diseases (A07.-)
A06.0 Acute amoebic dysentery
     Includes:
    Acute amoebiasis
   Intestinal amoebiasis NOS
A06.1 Chronic intestinal amoebiasis
A06.2 Amoebic nondysenteric colitis
A06.3 Amoeboma of intestine
     Includes:
    Amoeboma NOS
A06.4 Amoebic liver abscess
     Includes:
    Hepatic amoebiasis
A06.5† Amoebic lung abscess (J99.8*)
        Includes:
       Amoebic abscess of lung (and liver)
A06.6† Amoebic brain abscess (G07*)
        Includes:
       Amoebic abscess of brain (and liver)(and lung)
A06.7 Cutaneous amoebiasis
A06.8 Amoebic infection of other sites
     Includes:
    Amoebic:
   •
    appendicitis
   •
    balanitis† (N51.2*)
A06.9 Amoebiasis, unspecified
A07
Other protozoal intestinal diseases
A07.0 Balantidiasis
     Includes:
    Balantidial dysentery
A07.1 Giardiasis [lambliasis]
A07.2 Cryptosporidiosis
A07.3 Isosporiasis
     Includes:
    Infection due to Isospora belli and Isospora hominis
   Intestinal coccidiosis
  Isosporosis
A07.8 Other specified protozoal intestinal diseases
     Includes:
    Intestinal trichomoniasis
   Sarcocystosis
  Sarcosporidiosis
A07.9 Protozoal intestinal disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Flagellate diarrhoea
   Protozoal:
  •
   colitis
  •
   diarrhoea
  •
   dysentery
A08
Viral and other specified intestinal infections
Excludes:
influenza with involvement of gastrointestinal tract (J09, J10.8, J11.8)
A08.0 Rotaviral enteritis
A08.1 Acute gastroenteropathy due to Norwalk agent
     Includes:
    Small round structured virus enteritis
A08.2 Adenoviral enteritis
44
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
A08.3 Other viral enteritis
A08.4 Viral intestinal infection, unspecified
     Includes:
    Viral:
   •
    enteritis NOS
   •
    gastroenteritis NOS
   •
    gastroenteropathy NOS
A08.5 Other specified intestinal infections
A09
A09.9
Other gastroenteritis and colitis of infectious and unspecified origin
Excludes:
due to bacterial, protozoal, viral and other specified infectious agents (A00-A08)
noninfective (see noninfectious) diarrhoea (K52.9):
•
neonatal (P78.3)
A09.0 Other and unspecified gastroenteritis and colitis of infectious origin
     Includes:
    Catarrh, enteric or intestinal
   Diarrhoea:
  •
   acute bloody
  •
   acute hemorrhagic
  •
   acute watery
  •
   dysenteric
  •
   epidemic
  Infectious diarrhoea NOS
 Infectious or septic
•
 colitis
•
 enteritis
NOS haemorrhagic
•
 gastroenteritis
A09.9 Gastroenteritis and colitis of unspecified origin
45
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A15
Tuberculosis
(A15-A19)
Includes:
Excludes:
A15
A15.0
infections due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Mycobacterium bovis
congenital tuberculosis (P37.0)
pneumoconiosis associated with tuberculosis (J65)
sequelae of tuberculosis (B90.-)
silicotuberculosis (J65)
Respiratory tuberculosis, bacteriologically and histologically confirmed
Tuberculosis of lung, confirmed by sputum microscopy with or without culture
Includes:
Tuberculous:
•
•
•
•
bronchiectasis
fibrosis of lung
pneumonia
pneumothorax
confirmed by sputum microscopy with or without culture
A15.00o Tuberculosis of lung, confirmed by sputum microscopy with or without culture, with
       cavitation
A15.01o Tuberculosis of lung, confirmed by sputum microscopy with or without culture, without
       cavitation or unspecified
A15.1 Tuberculosis of lung, confirmed by culture only
     Includes: Conditions listed in A15.0, confirmed by culture only
A15.2 Tuberculosis of lung, confirmed histologically
     Includes: Conditions listed in A15.0, confirmed histologically
A15.20o Tuberculosis of lung, confirmed histologically, with cavitation
A15.21o Tuberculosis of lung, confirmed histologically, without cavitation or unspecified
A15.3 Tuberculosis of lung, confirmed by unspecified means
     Includes: Conditions listed in A15.0, confirmed but unspecified whether bacteriologically or histologically
A15.30o Tuberculosis of lung, confirmed by unspecified means, with cavitation
A15.31o Tuberculosis of lung, confirmed by unspecified means, without cavitation or unspecified
A15.4 Tuberculosis of intrathoracic lymph nodes, confirmed bacteriologically and histologically
     Includes:
    Tuberculosis of lymph nodes:
   •
    hilar
   •
    mediastinal
   confirmed bacteriologically and histologically
  •
   tracheobronchial
Excludes:
A15.5
specified as primary (A15.7)
Tuberculosis of larynx, trachea and bronchus confirmed bacteriologically and histologically
Includes:
Tuberculosis of:
•
•
•
•
46
bronchus
glottis
larynx
trachea
confirmed bacteriologically and histologically
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
A15.6
Tuberculous pleurisy, confirmed bacteriologically and histologically
Includes:
Tuberculosis of pleura
Tuberculous empyema
Excludes:
A16.21o
confirmed bacteriologically and histologically
in primary respiratory tuberculosis (A15.7)
A15.7 Primary respiratory tuberculosis, confirmed bacteriologically and histologically
A15.8 Other respiratory tuberculosis, confirmed bacteriologically and histologically
     Includes:
    Mediastinal tuberculosis
   Nasopharyngeal
  tuberculosis
 confirmed bacteriologically and histologically
Tuberculosis of:
•
 nose
•
 sinus [any part]
A15.9 Respiratory tuberculosis unspecified, confirmed bacteriologically and histologically
A15.90o Respiratory tuberculosis unspecified, confirmed bacteriologically and histologically with
       cavitation
A15.91o Respiratory tuberculosis unspecified, confirmed bacteriologically and histologically, without
       cavitation or unspecified
A16
A16.0
Respiratory tuberculosis, not confirmed bacteriologically or histologically
Tuberculosis of lung, bacteriologically and histologically negative
Includes:
Tuberculous:
•
•
•
•
bronchiectasis
fibrosis of lung
pneumonia
pneumothorax
bacteriologically and histologically negative
A16.1 Tuberculosis of lung, bacteriological and histological examination not done
     Includes: Conditions listed in A16.0, bacteriological and histological examination not done
A16.10o Tuberculosis of lung, bacteriological and histological examination not done, with cavitation
A16.11o Tuberculosis of lung, bacteriological and histological examination not done, without
       cavitation or unspecified
A16.2 Tuberculosis of lung, without mention of bacteriological or histological confirmation
     Includes:
    Tuberculous:
•
bronchiectasis
•
fibrosis of lung
•
pneumonia
•
pneumothorax
Tuberculosis of lung
NOS (without mention of bacteriological or histological
confirmation)
A16.20o Tuberculosis of lung, without mention of bacteriological or histological confirmation, with
       cavitation
A16.21o Tuberculosis of lung, without mention of bacteriological or histological confirmation, without
       cavitation or unspecified
47
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A16.3
A16.3
Tuberculosis of intrathoracic lymph nodes, without mention of bacteriological or histological
confirmation
Includes:
Tuberculosis of lymph nodes:
•
•
•
•
Excludes:
A16.4
NOS (without mention of bacteriological or histological
confirmation)
when specified as primary (A16.7)
Tuberculosis of larynx, trachea and bronchus, without mention of bacteriological or
histological confirmation
Includes:
Tuberculosis of:
•
•
•
•
A16.5
hilar
intrathoracic
mediastinal
tracheobronchial
bronchus
glottis
larynx
trachea
NOS (without mention of bacteriological or histological
confirmation)
Tuberculous pleurisy, without mention of bacteriological or histological confirmation
Includes:
Tuberculous:
•
empyema
•
pleurisy
Tuberculosis of pleura
Excludes:
NOS (without mention of bacteriological or histological
confirmation)
in primary respiratory tuberculosis (A16.7)
A16.7 Primary respiratory tuberculosis without mention of bacteriological or histological
     confirmation
    Includes:
   Primary:
  •
   respiratory tuberculosis
  •
   tuberculous complex
A16.8 Other respiratory tuberculosis, without mention of bacteriological or histological confirmation
     Includes:
    Mediastinal tuberculosis
   Nasopharyngeal
  NOS (without mention of bacteriological or histological
 tuberculosis
confirmation)
Tuberculosis of:
•
 nose
•
 sinus [any part]
A16.9 Respiratory tuberculosis unspecified, without mention of bacteriological or histological
     confirmation
    Includes:
   Respiratory tuberculosis NOS
  Tuberculosis NOS
A16.90o Respiratory tuberculosis unspecified, without mention of bacteriological or histological
       confirmation, with cavitation
A16.91o Respiratory tuberculosis unspecified, without mention of bacteriological or histological
       confirmation, without cavitation or unspecified
48
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
A17 †
Tuberculosis of nervous system
A17.0† A17.1† Meningeal tuberculoma (G07*)
                 Includes:
                Tuberculoma of meninges
A17.8† Other tuberculosis of nervous system
        Includes:
       Tuberculoma of:
      •
       brain (G07*)
      •
       spinal cord (G07*)
      Tuberculosis of:
     •
      brain (G07*)
     •
      spinal cord (G07*)
     Tuberculous:
    •
     abscess of brain (G07*)
    •
     meningoencephalitis (G05.0*)
    •
     myelitis (G05.0*)
    •
     polyneuropathy (G63.0*)
A17.9† 
A18.3
Tuberculous meningitis (G01*)
Includes:
Tuberculosis of meninges (cerebral)(spinal)
Tuberculous leptomeningitis
Tuberculosis of nervous system, unspecified (G99.8*)
A18
Tuberculosis of other organs
A18.0† Tuberculosis of bones and joints
        Includes:
       Tuberculosis of:
      •
       hip (M01.1*)
      •
       knee (M01.1*)
      •
       vertebral column (M49.0*)
      Tuberculous:
     •
      arthritis (M01.1*)
     •
      mastoiditis (H75.0*)
     •
      necrosis of bone (M90.0*)
     •
      osteitis (M90.0*)
     •
      osteomyelitis (M90.0*)
     •
      synovitis (M68.0*)
     •
      tenosynovitis (M68.0*)
A18.1 Tuberculosis of genitourinary system
     Includes:
    Tuberculosis of:
   •
    bladder † (N33.0*)
     •
      cervix † (N74.0*)
       •
        kidney † (N29.1*)
         •
          male genital organs † (N51.-*)
           •
            ureter † (N29.1*)
             Tuberculous female pelvic inflammatory disease (N74.1*)
A18.2 Tuberculous peripheral lymphadenopathy
     Includes:
    Tuberculous adenitis
   Excludes:
  tuberculosis of lymph nodes:
 •
  intrathoracic (A15.4, A16.3)
 •
  mesenteric and retroperitoneal (A18.3)
 tuberculous tracheobronchial adenopathy (A15.4, A16.3)
A18.3 Tuberculosis of intestines, peritoneum and mesenteric lymph nodes
     Includes:
    Tuberculosis (of):
   •
    anus and rectum† (K93.0*)
     •
      intestine (large)(small)† (K93.0*)
       •
        retroperitoneal (lymph nodes)
       Tuberculous:
      •
       ascites
      •
       enteritis† (K93.0*)
        •
         peritonitis† (K67.3*)
49
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A18.4 Tuberculosis of skin and subcutaneous tissue
     Includes:
    Erythema induratum, tuberculous
   Lupus:
  •
   exedens
  •
   vulgaris:
  •
   NOS
  •
   of eyelid† (H03.1*)
    Scrofuloderma
   Excludes:
  lupus erythematosus (L93.-)
 systemic (M32.-)
A18.5 Tuberculosis of eye
     Includes:
    Tuberculous:
   •
    chorioretinitis † (H32.0*)
     •
      episcleritis † (H19.0*)
       •
        interstitial keratitis † (H19.2*)
         •
          iridocyclitis † (H22.0*)
           •
            keratoconjunctivitis (interstitial)(phlyctenular)† (H19.2*)
             Excludes:
            lupus vulgaris of eyelid (A18.4)
A18.6 Tuberculosis of ear
     Includes:
    Tuberculous otitis media† (H67.0*)
     Excludes:
    tuberculous mastoiditis (A18.0†)
A18.7† Tuberculosis of adrenal glands (E35.1*)
        Includes:
       Addison's disease, tuberculous
A18.8 Tuberculosis of other specified organs
     Includes:
    Tuberculosis of:
   •
    endocardium † (I39.8*)
     •
      myocardium † (I41.0*)
       •
        oesophagus † (K23.0*)
         •
          pericardium † (I32.0*)
           •
            thyroid gland † (E35.0*)
             Tuberculous cerebral arteritis † (I68.1*)
A18.4
A19
Miliary tuberculosis
Includes:
tuberculosis:
•
disseminated
•
generalized
tuberculous polyserositis
A19.0 Acute miliary tuberculosis of a single specified site
A19.1 Acute miliary tuberculosis of multiple sites
A19.2 Acute miliary tuberculosis, unspecified
A19.8 Other miliary tuberculosis
A19.9 Miliary tuberculosis, unspecified
50
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
Certain zoonotic bacterial diseases
(A20-A28)
A20
A22.9
Plague
Includes:
infection due to Yersinia pestis
A20.0 Bubonic plague
A20.1 Cellulocutaneous plague
A20.2 Pneumonic plague
A20.3 Plague meningitis
A20.7 Septicaemic plague
A20.8 Other forms of plague
     Includes:
    Abortive plague
   Asymptomatic plague
  Pestis minor
A20.9 Plague, unspecified
A21
Tularaemia
Includes:
deer-fly fever
infection due to Francisella tularensis
rabbit fever
A21.0 Ulceroglandular tularaemia
A21.1 Oculoglandular tularaemia
     Includes:
    Ophthalmic tularaemia
A21.2 Pulmonary tularaemia
A21.3 Gastrointestinal tularaemia
     Includes:
    Abdominal tularaemia
A21.7 Generalized tularaemia
A21.8 Other forms of tularaemia
A21.9 Tularaemia, unspecified
A22
Anthrax
Includes:
infection due to Bacillus anthracis
A22.0 Cutaneous anthrax
     Includes:
    Malignant:
   •
    carbuncle
   •
    pustule
A22.1 Pulmonary anthrax
     Includes:
    Inhalation anthrax
   Ragpicker's disease
  Woolsorter's disease
A22.2 Gastrointestinal anthrax
A22.7 Anthrax sepsis
A22.8 Other forms of anthrax
     Includes:
    Anthrax meningitis† (G01*)
A22.9 Anthrax, unspecified
51
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A23
Brucellosis
Includes:
A23
fever:
•
Malta
•
Mediterranean
•
undulant
A23.0 Brucellosis due to Brucella melitensis
A23.1 Brucellosis due to Brucella abortus
A23.2 Brucellosis due to Brucella suis
A23.3 Brucellosis due to Brucella canis
A23.8 Other brucellosis
A23.9 Brucellosis, unspecified
A24
A24.0
Glanders and melioidosis
Glanders
Includes:
Infection due to Burkholderia mallei
Infection due to Pseudomonas mallei
Malleus
A24.1 Acute and fulminating melioidosis
     Includes:
    Melioidosis:
   •
    pneumonia
   •
    sepsis
A24.2 Subacute and chronic melioidosis
A24.3 Other melioidosis
A24.4 Melioidosis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Infection due to Burkholderia pseudomallei NOS
   Infection due to Pseudomonas pseudomallei NOS
  Whitmore's disease
A25
A25.0
Rat-bite fevers
Spirillosis
Includes:
Sodoku
A25.1 Streptobacillosis
     Includes:
    Epidemic arthritic erythema
   Haverhill fever
  Streptobacillary rat-bite fever
A25.9 Rat-bite fever, unspecified
A26
Erysipeloid
A26.0 Cutaneous erysipeloid
     Includes:
    Erythema migrans
A26.7 Erysipelothrix sepsis
A26.8 Other forms of erysipeloid
A26.9 Erysipeloid, unspecified
A27
Leptospirosis
A27.0 Leptospirosis icterohaemorrhagica
     Includes:
    Leptospirosis due to Leptospira interrogans serovar icterohaemorrhagiae
A27.8 Other forms of leptospirosis
A27.9 Leptospirosis, unspecified
52
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
A28
Other zoonotic bacterial diseases, not elsewhere classified
A28.0 A28.1 Cat-scratch disease
           Includes:
          Cat-scratch fever
A28.2 Extraintestinal yersiniosis
     Excludes:
    enteritis due to Yersinia enterocolitica (A04.6)
   plague (A20.-)
A28.8 Other specified zoonotic bacterial diseases, not elsewhere classified
A28.9 
A28.9
Pasteurellosis
Zoonotic bacterial disease, unspecified
53
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A30
Other bacterial diseases
(A30-A49)
A30
Leprosy [Hansen's disease]
Includes:
Excludes:
infection due to Mycobacterium leprae
sequelae of leprosy (B92)
A30.0 Indeterminate leprosy
     Includes:
    I leprosy
A30.1 Tuberculoid leprosy
     Includes:
    TT leprosy
A30.2 Borderline tuberculoid leprosy
     Includes:
    BT leprosy
A30.3 Borderline leprosy
     Includes:
    BB leprosy
A30.4 Borderline lepromatous leprosy
     Includes:
    BL leprosy
A30.5 Lepromatous leprosy
     Includes:
    LL leprosy
A30.8 Other forms of leprosy
A30.9 Leprosy, unspecified
A31
Infection due to other mycobacteria
Excludes:
leprosy (A30.-)
tuberculosis (A15-A19)
A31.0 Pulmonary mycobacterial infection
     Includes:
    Infection due to Mycobacterium:
   •
    avium
   •
    intracellulare [Battey bacillus]
   •
    kansasii
A31.1 Cutaneous mycobacterial infection
     Includes:
    Buruli ulcer
   Infection due to Mycobacterium:
  •
   marinum
  •
   ulcerans
A31.2o Disseminated mycobacterium avium-intracellulare complex [DMAC] infection
      Includes:
     Disseminated MAC
A31.8 Other mycobacterial infections
A31.9 Mycobacterial infection, unspecified
     Includes:
    Atypical mycobacterium infection NOS
   Mycobacteriosis NOS
A32
Listeriosis
Includes:
Excludes:
listerial foodborne infection
neonatal (disseminated) listeriosis (P37.2)
A32.0 Cutaneous listeriosis
A32.1† Listerial meningitis and meningoencephalitis
        Includes:
       Listerial:
      •
       meningitis (G01*)
      •
       meningoencephalitis (G05.0*)
A32.7 Listerial sepsis
54
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
A32.8
A32.9
Other forms of listeriosis
Includes:
Listerial:
•
cerebral arteritis† (I68.1*)
•
endocarditis† (I39.8*)
Oculoglandular listeriosis
A39.4
Listeriosis, unspecified
A33 Tetanus neonatorum
A34 Obstetrical tetanus
A35 Other tetanus
Includes:
Excludes:
A36
Tetanus NOS
tetanus:
•
neonatorum (A33)
•
obstetrical (A34)
Diphtheria
A36.0 Pharyngeal diphtheria
     Includes:
    Diphtheritic membranous angina
   Tonsillar diphtheria
A36.1 Nasopharyngeal diphtheria
A36.2 Laryngeal diphtheria
     Includes:
    Diphtheritic laryngotracheitis
A36.3 Cutaneous diphtheria
     Excludes:
    erythrasma (L08.1)
A36.8 Other diphtheria
     Includes:
    Diphtheritic:
   •
    conjunctivitis† (H13.1*)
     •
      myocarditis† (I41.0*)
       •
        polyneuritis† (G63.0*)
A36.9 Diphtheria, unspecified
A37
Whooping cough
A37.0 Whooping cough due to Bordetella pertussis
A37.1 Whooping cough due to Bordetella parapertussis
A37.8 Whooping cough due to other Bordetella species
A37.9 Whooping cough, unspecified
A38
Scarlet fever
Includes:
Excludes:
A39
Scarlatina
streptococcal sore throat (J02.0)
Meningococcal infection
A39.0† Meningococcal meningitis (G01*)
A39.1† Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome (E35.1*)
        Includes:
       Meningococcal haemorrhagic adrenalitis
      Meningococcic adrenal syndrome
A39.2 Acute meningococcaemia
A39.3 Chronic meningococcaemia
A39.4 Meningococcaemia, unspecified
     Includes:
    Meningococcal bacteraemia NOS
55
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A39.5† Meningococcal heart disease
        Includes:
       Meningococcal:
      •
       carditis NOS (I52.0*)
      •
       endocarditis (I39.8*)
      •
       myocarditis (I41.0*)
      •
       pericarditis (I32.0*)
A39.8 Other meningococcal infections
     Includes:
    Meningococcal:
   •
    arthritis† (M01.0*)
     •
      conjunctivitis† (H13.1*)
       •
        encephalitis† (G05.0*)
         •
          retrobulbar neuritis† (H48.1*)
           Postmeningococcal arthritis† (M03.0*)
A39.9 Meningococcal infection, unspecified
     Includes:
    Meningococcal disease NOS
A39.5†
A40
Streptococcal sepsis
Use additional code to identify resistance to antimicrobial and antineoplastic drugs (U82-U85)
Excludes:
during labour (O75.3)
following:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O03-OO7, O08.0)
•
immunization (T88.0)
•
infusion, transfusion or therapeutic injection (T80.2)
neonatal (P36.0-P36.1)
postprocedural (T81.4)
puerperal (O85)
sepsis due to Enterococcus (A41.80)
A40.0 Sepsis due to streptococcus, group A
A40.1 Sepsis due to streptococcus, group B
A40.2 Sepsis due to streptococcus, group D
A40.3 Sepsis due to Streptococcus pneumoniae
     Includes:
    Pneumococcal sepsis
A40.8 Other streptococcal sepsis
A40.9 Streptococcal sepsis, unspecified
56
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
A41
Other sepsis
Use additional code to identify resistance to antimicrobial and antineoplastic drugs (U82-U85)
Excludes:
bacteraemia NOS (A49.9)
during labour (O75.3)
following:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O03-O07, O08.0)
•
immunization (T88.0)
•
infusion, transfusion or therapeutic injection (T80.2)
sepsis (due to)(in):
•
actinomycotic (A42.7)
•
anthrax (A22.7)
•
candidal (B37.7)
•
Erysipelothrix (A26.7)
•
extraintestinal yersiniosis (A28.2)
•
gonococcal (A54.8)
•
herpesviral (B00.7)
•
listerial (A32.7)
•
meningococcal (A39.2- A39.4)
•
neonatal (P36.-)
•
postprocedural (T81.4)
•
puerperal (O85)
•
streptococcal (A40.-)
•
tularaemia (A21.7)
septic:
•
melioidosis (A24.1)
•
plague (A20.7)
toxic shock syndrome (A48.3)
A41.0 Sepsis due to Staphylococcus aureus
A41.1 Sepsis due to other specified staphylococcus
     Includes:
    Sepsis due to coagulase-negative staphylococcus
A41.2 Sepsis due to unspecified staphylococcus
A41.3 Sepsis due to Haemophilus influenzae
A41.4 Sepsis due to anaerobes
     Excludes:
    gas gangrene (A48.0)
A41.5 Sepsis due to other Gram-negative organisms
A41.50o Sepsis due to Escherichia coli [E.coli]
A41.51o Sepsis due to Pseudomonas
       Includes:
      Pseudomonas aeroginosa
A41.52o Sepsis due to Serratia
A41.58o Sepsis due to other gram-negative organisms
       Includes:
      Gram-negative sepsis NOS
A41.8 Other specified sepsis
A41.80o Sepsis due to enterococcus
       Excludes:
      due to Streptococcus D (A40.2)
A41.88o Other specified sepsis
A41.9 
A42.1
Sepsis, unspecified
Includes:
Septicaemia
Use additional code (R57.2) to identify septic shock
A42
Actinomycosis
Excludes:
actinomycetoma (B47.1)
A42.0 Pulmonary actinomycosis
A42.1 Abdominal actinomycosis
57
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A42.2 
A42.2
Cervicofacial actinomycosis
A42.7 Actinomycotic sepsis
A42.8 Other forms of actinomycosis
A42.9 Actinomycosis, unspecified
A43
Nocardiosis
A43.0 Pulmonary nocardiosis
A43.1 Cutaneous nocardiosis
A43.8 Other forms of nocardiosis
A43.9 Nocardiosis, unspecified
A44
Bartonellosis
A44.0 Systemic bartonellosis
     Includes:
    Oroya fever
A44.1 Cutaneous and mucocutaneous bartonellosis
     Includes:
    Verruga peruana
A44.8 Other forms of bartonellosis
A44.9 Bartonellosis, unspecified
A46
Erysipelas
Excludes:
A48
postpartum or puerperal erysipelas (O86-)
Other bacterial diseases, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
actinomycetoma (B47.1)
A48.0 Gas gangrene
     Includes:
    Clostridial:
   •
    cellulitis
   •
    myonecrosis
   Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth characters .51 to classify any associated
  diabetes mellitus.
A48.1 Legionnaires' disease
A48.2 Nonpneumonic Legionnaires' disease [Pontiac fever]
A48.3 Toxic shock syndrome
     Excludes:
    endotoxic shock NOS (R57.8)
   sepsis NOS (A41.9)
A48.4 Brazilian purpuric fever
     Includes:
    Systemic Haemophilus aegyptius infection
A48.8 Other specified bacterial diseases
58
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
A49
Bacterial infection of unspecified site
Use additional code to identify resistance to antimicrobial and antineoplastic drugs (U82-U85)
Excludes:
bacterial agents as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters (B95-B96)
chlamydial infection NOS (A74.9)
meningococcal infection NOS (A39.9)
rickettsial infection NOS (A79.9)
spirochaetal infection NOS (A69.9)
A49.0 Staphylococcal infection, unspecified site
A49.1 Streptococcal infection, unspecified site
A49.2 Haemophilus influenzae infection, unspecified site
A49.3 Mycoplasma infection, unspecified site
A49.8 Other bacterial infections of unspecified site
A49.9 
A49.9
Bacterial infection, unspecified
Includes:
Bacteraemia NOS
59
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A50
Infections with a predominantly sexual mode of transmission
(A50-A64)
Excludes:
A50
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease (B24)
nonspecific and nongonococcal urethritis (N34.1)
Reiter's disease (M02.3)
Congenital syphilis
A50.0 Early congenital syphilis, symptomatic
     Includes:
    Any congenital syphilitic condition specified as early or manifest less than two years after birth.
   Early congenital:
  •
   syphilis:
  •
   cutaneous
  •
   mucocutaneous
  •
   visceral
  •
   syphilitic:
  •
   laryngitis
  •
   oculopathy
  •
   osteochondropathy
  •
   pharyngitis
  •
   pneumonia
  •
   rhinitis
A50.1 Early congenital syphilis, latent
     Includes:
    Congenital syphilis without clinical manifestations, with positive serological reaction and
   negative spinal fluid test, less than two years after birth.
A50.2 Early congenital syphilis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital syphilis NOS less than two years after birth.
A50.3 Late congenital syphilitic oculopathy
     Includes:
    Late congenital syphilitic:
   •
    interstitial keratitis† (H19.2*)
     •
      oculopathy NEC† (H58.8*)
       Excludes:
      Hutchinson's triad (A50.5)
A50.4 Late congenital neurosyphilis [juvenile neurosyphilis]
     Includes:
    Dementia paralytica juvenilis
   Juvenile:
  •
   general paresis
  •
   tabes dorsalis
  •
   taboparetic neurosyphilis
  Late congenital syphilitic:
 •
  encephalitis† (G05.0*)
   •
    meningitis† (G01*)
     •
      polyneuropathy† (G63.0*)
       Use additional code to identify any associated mental disorder.
      Excludes:
     Hutchinson's triad (A50.5)
A50.5 Other late congenital syphilis, symptomatic
     Includes:
    Any congenital syphilitic condition specified as late or manifest two years or more after birth.
   Clutton's joints† (M03.1*)
    Hutchinson's:
   •
    teeth
   •
    triad
   Late congenital:
  •
   cardiovascular syphilis† (I98.0*)
    •
     syphilitic:
    •
     arthropathy† (M03.1*)
      •
       osteochondropathy† (M90.2*)
        Syphilitic saddle nose
60
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
A50.6
Late congenital syphilis, latent
Includes:
Congenital syphilis without clinical manifestations, with positive serological reaction and
negative spinal fluid test, two years or more after birth.
A50.7 Late congenital syphilis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital syphilis NOS two years or more after birth.
A50.9 
A52.1
Congenital syphilis, unspecified
A51
Early syphilis
A51.0 Primary genital syphilis
     Includes:
    Syphilitic chancre NOS
A51.1 Primary anal syphilis
A51.2 Primary syphilis of other sites
A51.3 Secondary syphilis of skin and mucous membranes
     Includes:
    Condyloma latum
   Syphilitic:
  •
   alopecia† (L99.8*)
    •
     leukoderma† (L99.8*)
      •
       mucous patch
A51.4 Other secondary syphilis
     Includes:
    Secondary syphilitic:
   •
    female pelvic inflammatory disease† (N74.2*)
     •
      iridocyclitis† (H22.0*)
       •
        lymphadenopathy
       •
        meningitis† (G01*)
         •
          myositis† (M63.0*)
           •
            oculopathy NEC† (H58.8*)
             •
              periostitis† (M90.1*)
A51.5 Early syphilis, latent
     Includes:
    Syphilis (acquired) without clinical manifestations, with positive serological reaction and
   negative spinal fluid test, less than two years after infection.
A51.9 Early syphilis, unspecified
A52
Late syphilis
A52.0† Cardiovascular syphilis
        Includes:
       Cardiovascular syphilis NOS (I98.0*)
      Syphilitic:
     •
      aneurysm of aorta (I79.0*)
     •
      aortic incompetence (I39.1*)
     •
      aortitis (I79.1*)
     •
      arteritis, cerebral (I68.1*)
     •
      endocarditis NOS (I39.8*)
     •
      myocarditis (I41.0*)
     •
      pericarditis (I32.0*)
     •
      pulmonary regurgitation (I39.3*)
A52.1 Symptomatic neurosyphilis
     Includes:
    Charcot's arthropathy† (M14.6*)
     Late syphilitic:
    •
     acoustic neuritis† (H94.0*)
      •
       encephalitis† (G05.0*)
        •
         meningitis† (G01*)
          •
           optic atrophy† (H48.0*)
            •
             polyneuropathy† (G63.0*)
              •
               retrobulbar neuritis† (H48.1*)
                Syphilitic parkinsonism† (G22*)
                 Tabes dorsalis
61
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A52.2 
A52.2
Asymptomatic neurosyphilis
A52.3 Neurosyphilis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Gumma (syphilitic)
   Syphilis (late)
  Syphiloma
A52.7
of central nervous system NOS
Other symptomatic late syphilis
Includes:
Glomerular disease in syphilis† (N08.0*)
Gumma (syphilitic)
any sites, except those classified to A52.0-A52.3
Late or tertiary syphilis
Late syphilitic:
•
bursitis† (M73.1*)
•
chorioretinitis† (H32.0*)
•
episcleritis† (H19.0*)
•
female pelvic inflammatory disease† (N74.2*)
•
leukoderma† (L99.8*)
•
oculopathy NEC† (H58.8*)
•
peritonitis† (K67.2*)
Syphilis [stage unspecified] of:
•
bone† (M90.2*)
•
liver† (K77.0*)
•
lung† (J99.8*)
•
muscle† (M63.0*)
•
synovium† (M68.0*)
A52.8 Late syphilis, latent
     Includes:
    Syphilis (acquired) without clinical manifestations, with positive serological reaction and
   negative spinal fluid test, two years or more after infection.
A52.9 Late syphilis, unspecified
A53
Other and unspecified syphilis
A53.0 Latent syphilis, unspecified as early or late
     Includes:
    Latent syphilis NOS
   Positive serological reaction for syphilis
A53.9 Syphilis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Infection due to Treponema pallidum NOS
   Syphilis (acquired) NOS
  Excludes:
 syphilis NOS causing death under two years of age (A50.2)
A54
Gonococcal infection
A54.0 Gonococcal infection of lower genitourinary tract without periurethral or accessory gland
     abscess
    Includes:
   Gonococcal:
  •
   cervicitis NOS
  •
   cystitis NOS
  •
   urethritis NOS
  •
   vulvovaginitis NOS
  Excludes:
 with:
•
 genitourinary gland abscess (A54.1)
•
 periurethral abscess (A54.1)
A54.1 Gonococcal infection of lower genitourinary tract with periurethral and accessory gland
     abscess
    Includes:
   Gonococcal Bartholin's gland abscess
62
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
A54.2
Gonococcal pelviperitonitis and other gonococcal genitourinary infections
Includes:
Gonococcal:
•
epididymitis † (N51.1*)
•
female pelvic inflammatory disease † (N74.3*)
•
orchitis † (N51.1*)
•
prostatitis † (N51.0*)
Excludes:
gonococcal peritonitis (A54.8)
A54.3 Gonococcal infection of eye
     Includes:
    Gonococcal:
   •
    conjunctivitis† (H13.1*)
     •
      iridocyclitis† (H22.0*)
       Ophthalmia neonatorum due to gonococcus
A54.4† Gonococcal infection of musculoskeletal system
        Includes:
       Gonococcal:
      •
       arthritis (M01.3*)
      •
       bursitis (M73.0*)
      •
       osteomyelitis (M90.2*)
      •
       synovitis (M68.0*)
      •
       tenosynovitis (M68.0*)
A54.5 Gonococcal pharyngitis
A54.6 Gonococcal infection of anus and rectum
A54.8 Other gonococcal infections
     Includes:
    Gonococcal:
   •
    brain abscess† (G07*)
     •
      endocarditis† (I39.8*)
       •
        meningitis† (G01*)
         •
          myocarditis† (I41.0*)
           •
            pericarditis† (I32.0*)
             •
              peritonitis† (K67.1*)
               •
                pneumonia† (J17.0*)
                 •
                  sepsis
                 •
                  skin lesions
                 Excludes:
                gonococcal pelviperitonitis (A54.2)
A54.9 
A56.0
Gonococcal infection, unspecified
A55
Chlamydial lymphogranuloma (venereum)
Includes:
A56
Other sexually transmitted chlamydial diseases
Includes:
Excludes:
A56.0
Climatic or tropical bubo
Durand-Nicolas-Favre disease
Esthiomene
Lymphogranuloma inguinale
sexually transmitted diseases due to Chlamydia trachomatis
chlamydial:
•
lymphogranuloma (A55)
•
neonatal:
•
conjunctivitis (P39.1)
•
pneumonia (P23.1)
conditions classified to A74.-
Chlamydial infection of lower genitourinary tract
Includes:
Chlamydial:
•
cervicitis
•
cystitis
•
urethritis
•
vulvovaginitis
63
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A56.1 Chlamydial infection of pelviperitoneum and other genitourinary organs
     Includes:
    Chlamydial:
   •
    epididymitis†(N51.1*)
     •
      female pelvic inflammatory disease† (N74.4*)
       •
        orchitis† (N51.1*)
A56.2 Chlamydial infection of genitourinary tract, unspecified
A56.3 Chlamydial infection of anus and rectum
A56.4 Chlamydial infection of pharynx
A56.8 Sexually transmitted chlamydial infection of other sites
A56.1
A57
Chancroid
Includes:
A58
Granuloma inguinale
Includes:
A59
Donovanosis
Trichomoniasis
Excludes:
A59.0
Ulcus molle
intestinal trichomoniasis (A07.8)
Urogenital trichomoniasis
Includes:
Leukorrhoea (vaginalis)
Prostatitis† (N51.0*)
A59.8 Trichomoniasis of other sites
A59.9 
due to Trichomonas (vaginalis)
Trichomoniasis, unspecified
A60
Anogenital herpesviral [herpes simplex] infection
A60.0 Herpesviral infection of genitalia and urogenital tract
     Includes:
    Herpesviral infection of genital tract:
   •
    female† (N77.0-N77.1*)
     •
      male† (N51.-*)
A60.1 Herpesviral infection of perianal skin and rectum
A60.9 Anogenital herpesviral infection, unspecified
A63
Other predominantly sexually transmitted diseases, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
molluscum contagiosum (B08.1)
papilloma of cervix (D26.0)
A63.0 Anogenital (venereal) warts
A63.8 Other specified predominantly sexually transmitted diseases
A64
Unspecified sexually transmitted disease
Includes:
64
Venereal disease NOS
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
Other spirochaetal diseases
(A65-A69)
Excludes:
A65
leptospirosis (A27.-)
syphilis (A50-A53)
Nonvenereal syphilis
Includes:
A66
A66.9
Bejel
Endemic syphilis
Njovera
Yaws
Includes:
bouba
framboesia (tropica)
pian
A66.0 Initial lesions of yaws
     Includes:
    Chancre of yaws
   Framboesia, initial or primary
  Initial framboesial ulcer
 Mother yaw
A66.1 Multiple papillomata and wet crab yaws
     Includes:
    Framboesioma
   Pianoma
  Plantar or palmar papilloma of yaws
A66.2 Other early skin lesions of yaws
     Includes:
    Cutaneous yaws, less than five years after infection
   Early yaws (cutaneous) (macular) (maculopapular) (micropapular) (papular)
  Framboeside of early yaws
A66.3 Hyperkeratosis of yaws
     Includes:
    Ghoul hand
   Hyperkeratosis, palmar or plantar (early)(late) due to yaws
  Worm-eaten soles
A66.4 Gummata and ulcers of yaws
     Includes:
    Gummatous framboeside
   Nodular late yaws (ulcerated)
A66.5 Gangosa
     Includes:
A66.6
Rhinopharyngitis mutilans
Bone and joint lesions of yaws
Includes:
Ganglion
Hydrarthrosis
Osteitis
Periostitis (hypertrophic)
Goundou
Gumma, bone
Gummatous osteitis or
periostitis
of yaws (early)(late)
of yaws (late)
A66.7 Other manifestations of yaws
     Includes:
    Juxta-articular nodules of yaws
   Mucosal yaws
A66.8 Latent yaws
     Includes:
    Yaws without clinical manifestations, with positive serology
A66.9 Yaws, unspecified
65
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A67
A67
A67.0
A67.1
A67.2
Pinta [carate]
Primary lesions of pinta
Includes:
Chancre
Papule
Intermediate lesions of pinta
Includes:
Erythematous plaques
Hyperchromic lesions
Hyperkeratosis
Pintids
Late lesions of pinta
Includes:
Skin lesions:
•
achromic
•
cicatricial
•
dyschromic
Cardiovascular lesions†
(I98.1*)
(primary) of pinta [carate]
of pinta [carate]
of pinta [carate]
A67.3 Mixed lesions of pinta
     Includes:
    Achromic with hyperchromic skin lesions of pinta [carate]
A67.9 Pinta, unspecified
A68
Relapsing fevers
Includes:
Excludes:
recurrent fever
Lyme disease (A69.2)
A68.0 Louse-borne relapsing fever
     Includes:
    Relapsing fever due to Borrelia recurrentis
A68.1 Tick-borne relapsing fever
     Includes:
    Relapsing fever due to any Borrelia species other than Borrelia recurrentis
A68.9 Relapsing fever, unspecified
A69
Other spirochaetal infections
A69.0 Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
     Includes:
    Cancrum oris
   Fusospirochaetal gangrene
  Noma
 Stomatitis gangrenosa
A69.1 Other Vincent's infections
     Includes:
    Fusospirochaetal pharyngitis
   Necrotizing ulcerative (acute):
  •
   gingivitis
  •
   gingivostomatitis
  Spirochaetal stomatitis
 Trench mouth
Vincent's:
•
 angina
•
 gingivitis
A69.2 Lyme disease
     Includes:
    Erythema chronicum migrans due to Borrelia burgdorferi
A69.8 Other specified spirochaetal infections
A69.9 Spirochaetal infection, unspecified
66
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
Other diseases caused by chlamydiae
(A70-A74)
A70
Chlamydia psittaci infection
Includes:
A71
A74.9
Ornithosis
Parrot fever
Psittacosis
Trachoma
Excludes:
sequelae of trachoma (B94.0)
A71.0 Initial stage of trachoma
     Includes:
    Trachoma dubium
A71.1 Active stage of trachoma
     Includes:
    Granular conjunctivitis (trachomatous)
   Trachomatous:
  •
   follicular conjunctivitis
  •
   pannus
A71.9 Trachoma, unspecified
A74
Other diseases caused by chlamydiae
Excludes:
chlamydial pneumonia (J16.0)
neonatal chlamydial:
•
conjunctivitis (P39.1)
•
pneumonia (P23.1)
sexually transmitted chlamydial diseases (A55-A56)
A74.0† Chlamydial conjunctivitis (H13.1*)
        Includes:
       Paratrachoma
A74.8 Other chlamydial diseases
     Includes:
    Chlamydial peritonitis† (K67.0*)
A74.9 Chlamydial infection, unspecified
     Includes:
    Chlamydiosis NOS
67
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A75
Rickettsioses
(A75-A79)
A75
Typhus fever
Excludes:
rickettsiosis due to Ehrlichia sennetsu (A79.8)
A75.0 Epidemic louse-borne typhus fever due to Rickettsia prowazekii
     Includes:
    Classical typhus (fever)
   Epidemic (louse-borne) typhus
A75.1 Recrudescent typhus [Brill's disease]
     Includes:
    Brill-Zinsser disease
A75.2 Typhus fever due to Rickettsia typhi
     Includes:
    Murine (flea-borne) typhus
A75.3 Typhus fever due to Rickettsia tsutsugamushi
     Includes:
    Scrub (mite-borne) typhus
   Tsutsugamushi fever
A75.9 Typhus fever, unspecified
     Includes:
    Typhus (fever) NOS
A77
Spotted fever [tick-borne rickettsioses]
A77.0 Spotted fever due to Rickettsia rickettsii
     Includes:
    Rocky Mountain spotted fever
   Sao Paulo fever
A77.1 Spotted fever due to Rickettsia conorii
     Includes:
    African tick typhus
   Boutonneuse fever
  India tick typhus
 Kenya tick typhus
Marseilles fever
Mediterranean tick fever
A77.2 Spotted fever due to Rickettsia sibirica
     Includes:
    North Asian tick fever
   Siberian tick typhus
A77.3 Spotted fever due to Rickettsia australis
     Includes:
    Queensland tick typhus
A77.8 Other spotted fevers
A77.9 Spotted fever, unspecified
     Includes:
    Tick-borne typhus NOS
68
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
A78
Q fever
Includes:
A79
Infection due to Coxiella burnetii
Nine Mile fever
Quadrilateral fever
A79.9
Other rickettsioses
A79.0 Trench fever
     Includes:
    Quintan fever
   Wolhynian fever
A79.1 Rickettsialpox due to Rickettsia akari
     Includes:
    Kew Garden fever
   Vesicular rickettsiosis
A79.8 Other specified rickettsioses
     Includes:
    Rickettsiosis due to Ehrlichia sennetsu
A79.9 Rickettsiosis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Rickettsial infection NOS
69
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A80
Viral infections of the central nervous system
(A80-A89)
Excludes:
A80
sequelae of:
•
poliomyelitis (B91)
•
viral encephalitis (B94.1)
Acute poliomyelitis
A80.0 Acute paralytic poliomyelitis, vaccine-associated
A80.1 Acute paralytic poliomyelitis, wild virus, imported
A80.2 Acute paralytic poliomyelitis, wild virus, indigenous
A80.3 Acute paralytic poliomyelitis, other and unspecified
A80.4 Acute nonparalytic poliomyelitis
A80.9 Acute poliomyelitis, unspecified
A81
Atypical virus infections of central nervous system
Includes:
Prion diseases of the central nervous system
A81.0 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
     Includes:
    Subacute spongiform encephalopathy
A81.1 Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
     Includes:
    Dawson's inclusion body encephalitis
   Van Bogaert's sclerosing leukoencephalopathy
A81.2 Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
     Includes:
    Multifocal leukoencephalopathy NOS
A81.8 Other atypical virus infections of central nervous system
     Includes:
    Kuru
A81.9 Atypical virus infection of central nervous system, unspecified
     Includes:
    Prion disease of central nervous system NOS
A82
Rabies
A82.0 Sylvatic rabies
A82.1 Urban rabies
A82.9 Rabies, unspecified
A83
Mosquito-borne viral encephalitis
Includes:
Excludes:
mosquito-borne viral meningoencephalitis
mosquito-borne West Nile viral encephalitis (A92.3)
Venezuelan equine encephalitis (A92.2)
A83.0 Japanese encephalitis
A83.1 Western equine encephalitis
A83.2 Eastern equine encephalitis
A83.3 St Louis encephalitis
A83.4 Australian encephalitis
     Includes:
    Kunjin virus disease
A83.5 California encephalitis
     Includes:
    California meningoencephalitis
   La Crosse encephalitis
70
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
A83.6 Rocio virus disease
     Includes:
    Rocio virus encephalitis
A83.8 Other mosquito-borne viral encephalitis
A83.9 Mosquito-borne viral encephalitis, unspecified
A84
A87.8
Tick-borne viral encephalitis
Includes:
tick-borne viral meningoencephalitis
A84.0 Far Eastern tick-borne encephalitis [Russian spring-summer encephalitis]
A84.1 Central European tick-borne encephalitis
A84.8 Other tick-borne viral encephalitis
     Includes:
    Louping ill
   Powassan virus disease
A84.9 Tick-borne viral encephalitis, unspecified
A85
Other viral encephalitis, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Excludes:
specified viral:
•
encephalomyelitis NEC
•
meningoencephalitis NEC
benign myalgic encephalomyelitis (G93.3)
encephalitis due to:
•
herpesvirus [herpes simplex] (B00.4)
•
measles virus (B05.0)
•
mumps virus (B26.2)
•
poliomyelitis virus (A80.-)
•
zoster (B02.0)
lymphocytic choriomeningitis (A87.2)
A85.0† Enteroviral encephalitis (G05.1*)
        Includes:
       Enteroviral encephalomyelitis
A85.1† Adenoviral encephalitis (G05.1*)
        Includes:
       Adenoviral meningoencephalitis
A85.2 Arthropod-borne viral encephalitis, unspecified
A85.8 Other specified viral encephalitis
     Includes:
    Encephalitis lethargica
   Von Economo-Cruchet disease
A86
Unspecified viral encephalitis
Includes:
A87
Viral:
•
encephalomyelitis NOS
•
meningoencephalitis NOS
Viral meningitis
Excludes:
meningitis due to:
•
herpesvirus [herpes simplex] (B00.3)
•
measles virus (B05.1)
•
mumps virus (B26.1)
•
poliomyelitis virus (A80.-)
•
zoster (B02.1)
A87.0† Enteroviral meningitis (G02.0*)
        Includes:
       Coxsackievirus meningitis
      Echovirus meningitis
A87.1† Adenoviral meningitis (G02.0*)
A87.2 Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
     Includes:
    Lymphocytic meningoencephalitis
A87.8 Other viral meningitis
71
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A87.9
A87.9
A88
Viral meningitis, unspecified
Other viral infections of central nervous system, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
viral:
•
encephalitis NOS (A86)
•
meningitis NOS (A87.9)
A88.0 Enteroviral exanthematous fever [Boston exanthem]
A88.1 Epidemic vertigo
A88.8 Other specified viral infections of central nervous system
A89
72
Unspecified viral infection of central nervous system
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
Arthropod-borne viral fevers and viral haemorrhagic fevers
(A90-A99)
A90
A95.9
Dengue fever [classical dengue]
Excludes:
dengue haemorrhagic fever (A91)
A91 Dengue haemorrhagic fever
A92 Other mosquito-borne viral fevers
Excludes:
Ross River disease (B33.1)
A92.0 Chikungunya virus disease
     Includes:
    Chikungunya (haemorrhagic) fever
A92.1 O'nyong-nyong fever
A92.2 Venezuelan equine fever
     Includes:
    Venezuelan equine:
   •
    encephalitis
   •
    encephalomyelitis virus disease
A92.3 West Nile virus infection
     Includes:
    West Nile:
   •
    encephalitis
   •
    encephalomyelitis
   •
    fever
   •
    meningitis
   •
    virus
   Use additional code to identify any associated
  •
   acute flaccid paralysis (G81.0-)
  •
   facial weakness (G51.9)
A92.4 Rift Valley fever
A92.8 Other specified mosquito-borne viral fevers
A92.9 Mosquito-borne viral fever, unspecified
A93
Other arthropod-borne viral fevers, not elsewhere classified
A93.0 Oropouche virus disease
     Includes:
    Oropouche fever
A93.1 Sandfly fever
     Includes:
    Pappataci fever
   Phlebotomus fever
A93.2 Colorado tick fever
A93.8 Other specified arthropod-borne viral fevers
     Includes:
    Piry virus disease
   Vesicular stomatitis virus disease [Indiana fever]
A94
Unspecified arthropod-borne viral fever
Includes:
A95
Arboviral fever NOS
Arbovirus infection NOS
Yellow fever
A95.0 Sylvatic yellow fever
     Includes:
    Jungle yellow fever
A95.1 Urban yellow fever
A95.9 Yellow fever, unspecified
73
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
A96
A96
Arenaviral haemorrhagic fever
A96.0 Junin haemorrhagic fever
     Includes:
    Argentinian haemorrhagic fever
A96.1 Machupo haemorrhagic fever
     Includes:
    Bolivian haemorrhagic fever
A96.2 Lassa fever
A96.8 Other arenaviral haemorrhagic fevers
A96.9 Arenaviral haemorrhagic fever, unspecified
A98
Other viral haemorrhagic fevers, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
chikungunya haemorrhagic fever (A92.0)
dengue haemorrhagic fever (A91)
A98.0 Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever
     Includes:
    Central Asian haemorrhagic fever
A98.1 Omsk haemorrhagic fever
A98.2 Kyasanur Forest disease
A98.3 Marburg virus disease
A98.4 Ebola virus disease
A98.5 Haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome
     Includes:
    Haemorrhagic fever:
   •
    epidemic
   •
    Korean
   •
    Russian
   Hantaan virus disease:
  •
   Hantavirus disease with renal manifestion
  Nephropathia epidemica
 Excludes:
hantavirus (cardio)pulmonary syndrome (B33.4†, J17.1*)
A98.8 Other specified viral haemorrhagic fevers
A99
74
Unspecified viral haemorrhagic fever
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
Viral infections characterized by skin and mucous membrane
lesions
(B00-B09)
B00
B01.8
Herpesviral [herpes simplex] infections
Excludes:
anogenital herpesviral infection (A60.-)
congenital herpesviral infection (P35.2)
gammaherpesviral mononucleosis (B27.0)
herpangina (B08.5)
B00.0 Eczema herpeticum
     Includes:
    Kaposi's varicelliform eruption
B00.1 Herpesviral vesicular dermatitis
     Includes:
    Herpes simplex:
   •
    facialis
   •
    labialis
Vesicular dermatitis of:
•
ear
•
lip
due to human (alpha) herpesvirus 2
B00.2 Herpesviral gingivostomatitis and pharyngotonsillitis
     Includes:
    Herpesviral pharyngitis
B00.3† Herpesviral meningitis (G02.0*)
B00.4† Herpesviral encephalitis (G05.1*)
        Includes:
       Herpesviral meningoencephalitis
      Simian B disease
B00.5 Herpesviral ocular disease
     Includes:
    Herpesviral:
   •
    conjunctivitis † (H13.1*)
     •
      dermatitis of eyelid † (H03.1*)
       •
        iridocyclitis † (H22.0*)
         •
          iritis † (H22.0*)
           •
            keratitis † (H19.1*)
             •
              keratoconjunctivitis † (H19.1*)
               •
                uveitis, anterior † (H22.0*)
B00.7 Disseminated herpesviral disease
     Includes:
    Herpesviral sepsis
B00.8 Other forms of herpesviral infection
     Includes:
    Herpesviral:
   •
    hepatitis† (K77.0*)
     •
      whitlow
B00.9 Herpesviral infection, unspecified
     Includes:
    Herpes simplex infection NOS
B01 Varicella [chickenpox]
B01.0† Varicella meningitis (G02.0*)
B01.1† Varicella encephalitis (G05.1*)
        Includes:
       Postchickenpox encephalitis
      Varicella encephalomyelitis
B01.2† Varicella pneumonia (J17.1*)
B01.8 Varicella with other complications
75
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
B01.9
B01.9
B02
Varicella without complication
Includes:
Varicella NOS
Zoster [herpes zoster]
Includes:
shingles
zona
B02.0† Zoster encephalitis (G05.1*)
        Includes:
       Zoster meningoencephalitis
B02.1† Zoster meningitis (G02.0*)
B02.2† Zoster with other nervous system involvement
        Includes:
       Postherpetic:
      •
       geniculate ganglionitis (G53.0*)
      •
       polyneuropathy (G63.0*)
      •
       trigeminal neuralgia (G53.0*)
B02.3 Zoster ocular disease
     Includes:
    Zoster:
   •
    blepharitis † (H03.1*)
     •
      conjunctivitis † (H13.1*)
       •
        iridocyclitis † (H22.0*)
         •
          iritis † (H22.0*)
           •
            keratitis † (H19.2*)
             •
              keratoconjunctivitis † (H19.2*)
               •
                scleritis † (H19.0*)
B02.7 Disseminated zoster
B02.8 Zoster with other complications
B02.9 Zoster without complication
     Includes:
    Zoster NOS
B03 Smallpox
B04 Monkeypox
B05 Measles
Includes:
Excludes:
morbilli
subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (A81.1)
B05.0† Measles complicated by encephalitis (G05.1*)
        Includes:
       Postmeasles encephalitis
B05.1† Measles complicated by meningitis (G02.0*)
        Includes:
       Postmeasles meningitis
B05.2† Measles complicated by pneumonia (J17.1*)
        Includes:
       Postmeasles pneumonia
B05.3† Measles complicated by otitis media (H67.1*)
        Includes:
       Postmeasles otitis media
B05.4 Measles with intestinal complications
B05.8 Measles with other complications
     Includes:
    Measles keratitis and keratoconjunctivitis† (H19.2*)
B05.9 Measles without complication
     Includes:
    Measles NOS
76
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
B06
Rubella [German measles]
Excludes:
congenital rubella (P35.0)
B06.0† B06.8 Rubella with other complications
              Includes:
             Rubella:
            •
             arthritis† (M01.4*)
              •
               pneumonia† (J17.1*)
B06.9 
B09
Rubella with neurological complications
Includes:
Rubella:
•
 encephalitis (G05.1*)
•
 meningitis (G02.0*)
•
 meningoencephalitis (G05.1*)
Rubella without complication
Includes:
Rubella NOS
B07
Viral warts
Includes:
Excludes:
B08
Verruca:
•
simplex
•
vulgaris
anogenital (venereal) warts (A63.0)
papilloma of:
•
bladder (D41.4)
•
cervix (D26.0)
•
larynx (D14.1)
Other viral infections characterized by skin and mucous membrane lesions,
not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
vesicular stomatitis virus disease (A93.8)
B08.0 Other orthopoxvirus infections
     Includes:
    Cowpox
   Orf virus disease
  Pseudocowpox [milker's node]
 Vaccinia
Excludes:
monkeypox (B04)
B08.1 Molluscum contagiosum
B08.2 Exanthema subitum [sixth disease]
B08.3 Erythema infectiosum [fifth disease]
B08.4 Enteroviral vesicular stomatitis with exanthem
     Includes:
    Hand, foot and mouth disease
B08.5 Enteroviral vesicular pharyngitis
     Includes:
    Herpangina
B08.8 Other specified viral infections characterized by skin and mucous membrane lesions
     Includes:
    Enteroviral lymphonodular pharyngitis
   Foot-and-mouth disease
  Tanapox virus disease
 Yaba pox virus disease
B09
Unspecified viral infection characterized by skin and mucous membrane
lesions
Includes:
Viral:
•
enanthema NOS
•
exanthema NOS
77
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
B15
Viral hepatitis
(B15-B19)
Note:
Excludes:
B15
Use additional code (Chapter XX), to identify drug, if post-transfusion hepatitis.
cytomegaloviral hepatitis (B25.1)
herpesviral [herpes simplex] hepatitis (B00.8)
sequelae of viral hepatitis (B94.2)
Acute hepatitis A
B15.0 Hepatitis A with hepatic coma
B15.9 Hepatitis A without hepatic coma
     Includes:
    Hepatitis A (acute)(viral) NOS
   Use additional code to identify any hepatic failure (K72.-)
B16
Acute hepatitis B
B16.0 Acute hepatitis B with delta-agent (coinfection) with hepatic coma
B16.1 Acute hepatitis B with delta-agent (coinfection) without hepatic coma
     Use additional code to identify any hepatic failure (K72.-)
B16.2 Acute hepatitis B without delta-agent with hepatic coma
B16.9 Acute hepatitis B without delta-agent and without hepatic coma
     Includes:
    Hepatitis B (acute)(viral) NOS
   Use additional code to identify any hepatic failure (K72.-)
B17
Other acute viral hepatitis
B17.0 Acute delta-(super)infection of hepatitis B carrier
B17.1 Acute hepatitis C
B17.2 Acute hepatitis E
B17.8 Other specified acute viral hepatitis
     Includes:
    Acute hepatitis G
   Hepatitis non-A non-B (acute)(viral) NEC
B17.9 Acute viral hepatitis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Acute hepatitis NOS
B18
Chronic viral hepatitis
B18.0 Chronic viral hepatitis B with delta-agent
B18.1 Chronic viral hepatitis B without delta-agent
     Includes:
    Chronic (viral) hepatitis B
B18.2 Chronic viral hepatitis C
B18.8 Other chronic viral hepatitis
B18.9 Chronic viral hepatitis, unspecified
B19
Unspecified viral hepatitis
B19.0 Unspecified viral hepatitis with hepatic coma
B19.9 Unspecified viral hepatitis without hepatic coma
     Includes:
    Viral hepatitis NOS
   Use additional code to identify any hepatic failure (K72.-)
78
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease
(B24)
B24o
B27.1
Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease
Includes:
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS] NOS
AIDS-related complex [ARC] NOS
Use additional code(s) to identify all manifestations of HIV disease
Excludes:
asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection status (Z21)
exposure to HIV virus (Z20.6)
HIV disease complicating pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O98.7-)
nonconclusive serologic evidence of HIV (R75)
Other viral diseases
(B25-B34)
B25
Cytomegaloviral disease
Excludes:
congenital cytomegalovirus infection (P35.1)
cytomegaloviral mononucleosis (B27.1)
B25.0† Cytomegaloviral pneumonitis (J17.1*)
B25.1† Cytomegaloviral hepatitis (K77.0*)
B25.2† Cytomegaloviral pancreatitis (K87.1*)
B25.8 Other cytomegaloviral diseases
B25.9 Cytomegaloviral disease, unspecified
B26
Mumps
Includes:
parotitis:
•
epidemic
•
infectious
B26.0† Mumps orchitis (N51.1*)
B26.1† Mumps meningitis (G02.0*)
B26.2† Mumps encephalitis (G05.1*)
B26.3† Mumps pancreatitis (K87.1*)
B26.8 Mumps with other complications
     Includes:
    Mumps:
   •
    arthritis† (M01.5*)
     •
      myocarditis† (I41.1*)
       •
        nephritis† (N08.0*)
         •
          polyneuropathy† (G63.0*)
B26.9 Mumps without complication
     Includes:
    Mumps:
   •
    NOS
   •
    parotitis NOS
B27
Infectious mononucleosis
Includes:
glandular fever
monocytic angina
Pfeiffer's disease
B27.0 Gammaherpesviral mononucleosis
     Includes:
    Mononucleosis due to Epstein-Barr virus
B27.1 Cytomegaloviral mononucleosis
79
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
B27.8 
B27.8
Other infectious mononucleosis
B27.9 Infectious mononucleosis, unspecified
B30
Viral conjunctivitis
Excludes:
ocular disease:
•
herpesviral [herpes simplex] (B00.5)
•
zoster (B02.3)
B30.0† Keratoconjunctivitis due to adenovirus (H19.2*)
        Includes:
       Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis
      Shipyard eye
B30.1† Conjunctivitis due to adenovirus (H13.1*)
        Includes:
       Acute adenoviral follicular conjunctivitis
      Swimming-pool conjunctivitis
B30.2 Viral pharyngoconjunctivitis
     Includes:
    Béal's conjunctivitis
B30.3† Acute epidemic haemorrhagic conjunctivitis (enteroviral) (H13.1*)
        Includes:
       Conjunctivitis due to:
      •
       coxsackievirus 24
      •
       enterovirus 70
      Haemorrhagic conjunctivitis (acute)(epidemic)
B30.8† Other viral conjunctivitis (H13.1*)
        Includes:
       Newcastle conjunctivitis
B30.9 Viral conjunctivitis, unspecified
B33
Other viral diseases, not elsewhere classified
B33.0 Epidemic myalgia
     Includes:
    Bornholm disease
B33.1 Ross River disease
     Includes:
    Epidemic polyarthritis and exanthema
   Ross River fever
B33.2 Viral carditis
B33.3 Retrovirus infections, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Retrovirus infection NOS
B33.4† Hantavirus (cardio)pulmonary syndrome [HPS] [HCPS](J17.1*)
        Note:
       Use additional code (N17.9) to identify any renal failure associated with HPS caused by the
      Andes, Bayou and Black Creek Canal hantavirus etiologies.
     Includes:
    Hantavirus disease with pulmonary manifestions
   Sin Nombre virus disease
  Excludes:
 haemorrhagic fever with renal manifestations (A98.5†, N08.0*)
B33.8 Other specified viral diseases
80
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
B34
Viral infection of unspecified site
Excludes:
cytomegaloviral disease NOS (B25.9)
herpesvirus [herpes simplex] infection NOS (B00.9)
retrovirus infection NOS (B33.3)
viral agents as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters (B97.-)
B34.0 Adenovirus infection, unspecified site
B34.1 Enterovirus infection, unspecified site
     Includes:
    Coxsackievirus infection NOS
   Echovirus infection NOS
B34.2 Coronavirus infection, unspecified site
     Excludes:
    severe acute respiratory syndrome [SARS] (U04.9- )
B34.3 Parvovirus infection, unspecified site
B34.4 Papovavirus infection, unspecified site
B34.8 Other viral infections of unspecified site
B34.9 
B34.9
Viral infection, unspecified
Includes:
Viraemia NOS
81
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
B35
Mycoses
(B35-B49)
Excludes:
B35
hypersensitivity pneumonitis due to organic dust (J67.-)
mycosis fungoides (C84.0)
Dermatophytosis
Includes:
favus
infections due to species of Epidermophyton, Microsporum and Trichophyton
tinea, any type except those in B36.-
B35.0 Tinea barbae and tinea capitis
     Includes:
    Beard ringworm
   Kerion
  Scalp ringworm
 Sycosis, mycotic
B35.1 Tinea unguium
     Includes:
    Dermatophytic onychia
   Dermatophytosis of nail
  Onychomycosis
 Ringworm of nails
B35.2 Tinea manuum
     Includes:
    Dermatophytosis of hand
   Hand ringworm
B35.3 Tinea pedis
     Includes:
    Athlete's foot
   Dermatophytosis of foot
  Foot ringworm
B35.4 Tinea corporis
     Includes:
    Ringworm of the body
B35.5 Tinea imbricata
     Includes:
    Tokelau
B35.6 Tinea cruris
     Includes:
    Dhobi itch
   Groin ringworm
  Jock itch
B35.8 Other dermatophytoses
     Includes:
    Dermatophytosis:
   •
    disseminated
   •
    granulomatous
B35.9 Dermatophytosis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Ringworm NOS
B36
Other superficial mycoses
B36.0 Pityriasis versicolor
     Includes:
    Tinea:
   •
    flava
   •
    versicolor
B36.1 Tinea nigra
     Includes:
    Keratomycosis nigricans palmaris
   Microsporosis nigra
  Pityriasis nigra
82
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
B36.2 White piedra
     Includes:
    Tinea blanca
B36.3 Black piedra
B36.8 Other specified superficial mycoses
B36.9 Superficial mycosis, unspecified
B37
B38.9
Candidiasis
Includes:
Excludes:
candidosis
moniliasis
neonatal candidiasis (P37.5)
B37.0 Candidal stomatitis
     Includes:
    Oral thrush
B37.1 Pulmonary candidiasis
B37.2 Candidiasis of skin and nail
     Includes:
    Candidal:
   •
    onychia
   •
    paronychia
   Excludes:
  diaper [napkin] dermatitis (L22)
B37.3† Candidiasis of vulva and vagina (N77.1*)
        Includes:
       Candidal vulvovaginitis
      Monilial vulvovaginitis
     Vaginal thrush
B37.4 Candidiasis of other urogenital sites
     Includes:
    Candidal:
   •
    balanitis † (N51.2*)
     •
      urethritis † (N37.0*)
B37.5† Candidal meningitis (G02.1*)
B37.6† Candidal endocarditis (I39.8*)
B37.7 Candidal sepsis
B37.8 Candidiasis of other sites
B37.80o Candidal esophagitis
B37.81o Candidal enteritis
B37.82o Candidal cheilitis
B37.83o Candidal otitis externa
B37.88o Candidiasis of other sites
B37.9 Candidiasis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Thrush NOS
B38 Coccidioidomycosis
B38.0 Acute pulmonary coccidioidomycosis
B38.1 Chronic pulmonary coccidioidomycosis
B38.2 Pulmonary coccidioidomycosis, unspecified
B38.3 Cutaneous coccidioidomycosis
B38.4† Coccidioidomycosis meningitis (G02.1*)
B38.7 Disseminated coccidioidomycosis
     Includes:
    Generalized coccidioidomycosis
B38.8 Other forms of coccidioidomycosis
B38.9 Coccidioidomycosis, unspecified
83
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
B39
B39
Histoplasmosis
B39.0 Acute pulmonary histoplasmosis capsulati
B39.1 Chronic pulmonary histoplasmosis capsulati
B39.2 Pulmonary histoplasmosis capsulati, unspecified
B39.3 Disseminated histoplasmosis capsulati
     Includes:
    Generalized histoplasmosis capsulati
B39.4 Histoplasmosis capsulati, unspecified
     Includes:
    American histoplasmosis
B39.5 Histoplasmosis duboisii
     Includes:
    African histoplasmosis
B39.9 Histoplasmosis, unspecified
B40
Blastomycosis
Excludes:
Brazilian blastomycosis (B41.-)
keloidal blastomycosis (B48.0)
B40.0 Acute pulmonary blastomycosis
B40.1 Chronic pulmonary blastomycosis
B40.2 Pulmonary blastomycosis, unspecified
B40.3 Cutaneous blastomycosis
B40.7 Disseminated blastomycosis
     Includes:
    Generalized blastomycosis
B40.8 Other forms of blastomycosis
B40.9 Blastomycosis, unspecified
B41
Paracoccidioidomycosis
Includes:
Brazilian blastomycosis
Lutz' disease
B41.0 Pulmonary paracoccidioidomycosis
B41.7 Disseminated paracoccidioidomycosis
     Includes:
    Generalized paracoccidioidomycosis
B41.8 Other forms of paracoccidioidomycosis
B41.9 Paracoccidioidomycosis, unspecified
B42
Sporotrichosis
B42.0† Pulmonary sporotrichosis (J99.8*)
B42.1 Lymphocutaneous sporotrichosis
B42.7 Disseminated sporotrichosis
     Includes:
    Generalized sporotrichosis
B42.8 Other forms of sporotrichosis
     Includes:
    Cerebral sporotrichosis
B42.9 Sporotrichosis, unspecified
B43
Chromomycosis and phaeomycotic abscess
B43.0 Cutaneous chromomycosis
     Includes:
    Dermatitis verrucosa
B43.1 Phaeomycotic brain abscess
     Includes:
    Cerebral chromomycosis
84
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
B43.2 Subcutaneous phaeomycotic abscess and cyst
B43.8 Other forms of chromomycosis
B43.9 Chromomycosis, unspecified
B44
B47.1
Aspergillosis
Includes:
Excludes:
aspergilloma
allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (J67.90)
B44.0 Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
B44.1 Other pulmonary aspergillosis
B44.2 Tonsillar aspergillosis
B44.7 Disseminated aspergillosis
     Includes:
    Generalized aspergillosis
B44.8 Other forms of aspergillosis
B44.9 Aspergillosis, unspecified
B45
Cryptococcosis
B45.0 Pulmonary cryptococcosis
B45.1 Cerebral cryptococcosis
     Includes:
    Cryptococcal meningitis† (G02.1*)
     Cryptococcosis meningocerebralis
B45.2 Cutaneous cryptococcosis
B45.3 Osseous cryptococcosis
B45.7 Disseminated cryptococcosis
     Includes:
    Generalized cryptococcosis
B45.8 Other forms of cryptococcosis
B45.9 Cryptococcosis, unspecified
B46
Zygomycosis
B46.0 Pulmonary mucormycosis
B46.1 Rhinocerebral mucormycosis
B46.2 Gastrointestinal mucormycosis
B46.3 Cutaneous mucormycosis
     Includes:
    Subcutaneous mucormycosis
B46.4 Disseminated mucormycosis
     Includes:
    Generalized mucormycosis
B46.5 Mucormycosis, unspecified
B46.8 Other zygomycoses
     Includes:
    Entomophthoromycosis
B46.9 Zygomycosis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Phycomycosis NOS
B47
Mycetoma
B47.0 Eumycetoma
     Includes:
    Madura foot, mycotic
   Maduromycosis
B47.1 Actinomycetoma
85
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
B47.9
B47.9
B48
Mycetoma, unspecified
Includes:
Madura foot NOS
Other mycoses, not elsewhere classified
B48.0 Lobomycosis
     Includes:
    Keloidal blastomycosis
   Lobo's disease
B48.1 Rhinosporidiosis
B48.2 Allescheriasis
     Includes:
    Infection due to Pseudallescheria boydii
   Excludes:
  eumycetoma (B47.0)
B48.3 Geotrichosis
     Includes:
    Geotrichum stomatitis
B48.4 Penicillosis
B48.7 Opportunistic mycoses
     Note:
    Mycoses caused by fungi of low virulence that can establish an infection only as a consequence
   of factors such as the presence of debilitating disease or the administration of
  immunosuppressive and other therapeutic agents or radiation therapy. Most of the causal fungi
 are normally saprophytic in soil and decaying vegetation.
B48.8 Other specified mycoses
     Includes:
    Adiaspiromycosis
B49
Unspecified mycosis
Includes:
86
Fungaemia NOS
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
Protozoal diseases
(B50-B64)
Excludes:
B50
B54
amoebiasis (A06.-)
other protozoal intestinal diseases (A07.-)
Plasmodium falciparum malaria
Includes:
mixed infections of Plasmodium falciparum with any other Plasmodium species
B50.0 Plasmodium falciparum malaria with cerebral complications
     Includes:
    Cerebral malaria NOS
B50.8 Other severe and complicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria
     Includes:
    Severe or complicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria NOS
B50.9 Plasmodium falciparum malaria, unspecified
B51
Plasmodium vivax malaria
Includes:
Excludes:
mixed infections of Plasmodium vivax with other Plasmodium species, except Plasmodium
falciparum
when mixed with Plasmodium falciparum (B50.-)
B51.0 Plasmodium vivax malaria with rupture of spleen
B51.8 Plasmodium vivax malaria with other complications
B51.9 Plasmodium vivax malaria without complication
     Includes:
    Plasmodium vivax malaria NOS
B52
Plasmodium malariae malaria
Includes:
Excludes:
mixed infections of Plasmodium malariae with other Plasmodium species, except Plasmodium
falciparum and Plasmodium vivax
when mixed with Plasmodium:
•
falciparum (B50.-)
•
vivax (B51.-)
B52.0 Plasmodium malariae malaria with nephropathy
B52.8 Plasmodium malariae malaria with other complications
B52.9 Plasmodium malariae malaria without complication
     Includes:
    Plasmodium malariae malaria NOS
B53
Other parasitologically confirmed malaria
B53.0 Plasmodium ovale malaria
     Excludes:
    when mixed with Plasmodium:
   •
    falciparum (B50.-)
   •
    malariae (B52.-)
   •
    vivax (B51.-)
B53.1 Malaria due to simian plasmodia
     Excludes:
    when mixed with Plasmodium:
   •
    falciparum (B50.-)
   •
    malariae (B52.-)
   •
    ovale (B53.0)
   •
    vivax (B51.-)
B53.8 Other parasitologically confirmed malaria, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Parasitologically confirmed malaria NOS
B54
Unspecified malaria
Includes:
Clinically diagnosed malaria without parasitological confirmation
87
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
B55
B55
Leishmaniasis
B55.0 Visceral leishmaniasis
     Includes:
    Kala-azar
   Post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis
B55.1 Cutaneous leishmaniasis
B55.2 Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis
B55.9 Leishmaniasis, unspecified
B56
African trypanosomiasis
B56.0 Gambiense trypanosomiasis
     Includes:
    Infection due to Trypanosoma brucei gambiense
   West African sleeping sickness
B56.1 Rhodesiense trypanosomiasis
     Includes:
    East African sleeping sickness
   Infection due to Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense
B56.9 African trypanosomiasis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Sleeping sickness NOS
   Trypanosomiasis NOS, in places where African trypanosomiasis is prevalent
B57
Chagas' disease
Includes:
American trypanosomiasis
infection due to Trypanosoma cruzi
B57.0† Acute Chagas' disease with heart involvement (I41.2*, I98.1*)
        Includes:
       Acute Chagas' disease with:
      •
       cardiovascular involvement NEC (I98.1*)
      •
       myocarditis (I41.2*)
B57.1 Acute Chagas' disease without heart involvement
     Includes:
    Acute Chagas' disease NOS
B57.2 Chagas' disease (chronic) with heart involvement
     Includes:
    American trypanosomiasis NOS
   Chagas' disease (chronic) (with):
  •
   NOS
  •
   cardiovascular involvement NEC † (I98.1*)
    •
     myocarditis † (I41.2*)
      Trypanosomiasis NOS, in places where Chagas' disease is prevalent
B57.3 Chagas' disease (chronic) with digestive system involvement
B57.4 Chagas' disease (chronic) with nervous system involvement
B57.5 Chagas' disease (chronic) with other organ involvement
B58
Toxoplasmosis
Includes:
Excludes:
infection due to Toxoplasma gondii
congenital toxoplasmosis (P37.1)
B58.0† Toxoplasma oculopathy
        Includes:
       Toxoplasma chorioretinitis (H32.0*)
B58.1† Toxoplasma hepatitis (K77.0*)
B58.2† Toxoplasma meningoencephalitis (G05.2*)
B58.3† Pulmonary toxoplasmosis (J17.3*)
88
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
B58.8
B58.9
B59†
Toxoplasmosis with other organ involvement
Includes:
Toxoplasma:
•
myocarditis† (I41.2*)
•
myositis† (M63.1*)
Toxoplasmosis, unspecified
Pneumocystosis (J17.3*)
Includes:
B60
B64
Pneumonia due to:
•
Pneumocystis jirovecii
•
Pneumocystis carinii
Other protozoal diseases, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
cryptosporidiosis (A07.2)
intestinal microsporidosis (A07.8)
isosporiasis (A07.3)
B60.0 Babesiosis
     Includes:
    Piroplasmosis
B60.1 Acanthamoebiasis
     Includes:
    Conjunctivitis due to Acanthamoeba† (H13.1*)
     Keratoconjunctivitis due to Acanthamoeba† (H19.2*)
B60.2 Naegleriasis
     Includes:
    Primary amoebic meningoencephalitis† (G05.2*)
B60.8 Other specified protozoal diseases
     Includes:
    Microsporidiosis
B64
Unspecified protozoal disease
89
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
B65
Helminthiases
(B65-B83)
B65
Schistosomiasis [bilharziasis]
Includes:
snail fever
B65.0 Schistosomiasis due to Schistosoma haematobium [urinary schistosomiasis]
B65.1 Schistosomiasis due to Schistosoma mansoni [intestinal schistosomiasis]
B65.2 Schistosomiasis due to Schistosoma japonicum
     Includes:
    Asiatic schistosomiasis
B65.3 Cercarial dermatitis
     Includes:
    Swimmer's itch
B65.8 Other schistosomiases
     Includes:
    Infection due to Schistosoma:
   •
    intercalatum
   •
    mattheei
   •
    mekongi
B65.9 Schistosomiasis, unspecified
B66
Other fluke infections
B66.0 Opisthorchiasis
     Includes:
    Infection due to:
   •
    cat liver fluke
   •
    Opisthorchis (felineus)(viverrini)
B66.1 Clonorchiasis
     Includes:
    Chinese liver fluke disease
   Infection due to Clonorchis sinensis
  Oriental liver fluke disease
B66.2 Dicrocoeliasis
     Includes:
    Infection due to Dicrocoelium dendriticum
   Lancet fluke infection
B66.3 Fascioliasis
     Includes:
    Infection due to Fasciola:
   •
    gigantica
   •
    hepatica
   •
    indica
   Sheep liver fluke disease
B66.4 Paragonimiasis
     Includes:
    Infection due to Paragonimus species
   Lung fluke disease
  Pulmonary distomiasis
B66.5 Fasciolopsiasis
     Includes:
    Infection due to Fasciolopsis buski
   Intestinal distomiasis
B66.8 Other specified fluke infections
     Includes:
    Echinostomiasis
   Heterophyiasis
  Metagonimiasis
 Nanophyetiasis
Watsoniasis
B66.9 Fluke infection, unspecified
90
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
B67
Echinococcosis
Includes:
hydatidosis
B67.0 B67.1 Echinococcus granulosus infection of lung
B67.2 Echinococcus granulosus infection of bone
B67.3 Echinococcus granulosus infection, other and multiple sites
B67.4 Echinococcus granulosus infection, unspecified
B67.5 Echinococcus multilocularis infection of liver
B67.6 Echinococcus multilocularis infection, other and multiple sites
B67.7 Echinococcus multilocularis infection, unspecified
B67.8 Echinococcosis, unspecified, of liver
B67.9 
B71.8
Echinococcus granulosus infection of liver
Echinococcosis, other and unspecified
Includes:
Echinococcosis NOS
B68
Taeniasis
Excludes:
cysticercosis (B69.-)
B68.0 Taenia solium taeniasis
     Includes:
    Pork tapeworm (infection)
B68.1 Taenia saginata taeniasis
     Includes:
    Beef tapeworm (infection)
   Infection due to adult tapeworm Taenia saginata
B68.9 Taeniasis, unspecified
B69
Cysticercosis
Includes:
cysticerciasis infection due to larval form of Taenia solium
B69.0 Cysticercosis of central nervous system
B69.1 Cysticercosis of eye
B69.8 Cysticercosis of other sites
B69.9 Cysticercosis, unspecified
B70
Diphyllobothriasis and sparganosis
B70.0 Diphyllobothriasis
     Includes:
    Diphyllobothrium (adult)(latum)(pacificum) infection
   Fish tapeworm (infection)
  Excludes:
 larval diphyllobothriasis (B70.1)
B70.1 Sparganosis
     Includes:
    Infection due to:
   •
    Sparganum (mansoni)(proliferum)
   •
    Spirometra larvae
   Larval diphyllobothriasis
  Spirometrosis
B71
Other cestode infections
B71.0 Hymenolepiasis
     Includes:
    Dwarf tapeworm (infection)
   Rat tapeworm (infection)
B71.1 Dipylidiasis
B71.8 Other specified cestode infections
     Includes:
    Coenurosis
91
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
B71.9
B71.9
B72
Cestode infection, unspecified
Includes:
Tapeworm (infection) NOS
Dracunculiasis
Includes:
B73
Onchocerciasis
Includes:
B74
Guinea worm infection
Infection due to Dracunculus medinensis
Onchocerca volvulus infection
Onchocercosis
River blindness
Filariasis
Excludes:
onchocerciasis (B73)
tropical (pulmonary) eosinophilia NOS (J82)
B74.0 Filariasis due to Wuchereria bancrofti
     Includes:
    Bancroftian:
   •
    elephantiasis
   •
    filariasis
B74.1 Filariasis due to Brugia malayi
B74.2 Filariasis due to Brugia timori
B74.3 Loiasis
     Includes:
Calabar swelling
Eyeworm disease of Africa
Loa loa infection
B74.4 Mansonelliasis
     Includes:
    Infection due to Mansonella:
   •
    ozzardi
   •
    perstans
   •
    streptocerca
B74.8 Other filariases
     Includes:
    Dirofilariasis
B74.9 Filariasis, unspecified
B75
Trichinellosis
Includes:
B76
Infection due to Trichinella species
Trichiniasis
Hookworm diseases
Includes:
uncinariasis
B76.0 Ancylostomiasis
     Includes:
    Infection due to Ancylostoma species
B76.1 Necatoriasis
     Includes:
    Infection due to Necator americanus
B76.8 Other hookworm diseases
B76.9 Hookworm disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Cutaneous larva migrans NOS
B77
Ascariasis
Includes:
ascaridiasis
roundworm infection
B77.0 Ascariasis with intestinal complications
B77.8 Ascariasis with other complications
92
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
B77.9
B78
Ascariasis, unspecified
Strongyloidiasis
Excludes:
B83.0
trichostrongyliasis (B81.2)
B78.0 Intestinal strongyloidiasis
B78.1 Cutaneous strongyloidiasis
B78.7 Disseminated strongyloidiasis
B78.9 Strongyloidiasis, unspecified
B79
Trichuriasis
Includes:
B80
Enterobiasis
Includes:
B81
Trichocephaliasis
Whipworm (disease)(infection)
Oxyuriasis
Pinworm infection
Threadworm infection
Other intestinal helminthiases, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
angiostrongyliasis due to Angiostrongylus cantonensis (B83.2)
angiostrongyliasis due to Parastrongylus cantonensis (B83.2)
B81.0 Anisakiasis
     Includes:
    Infection due to Anisakis larvae
B81.1 Intestinal capillariasis
     Includes:
    Capillariasis NOS
   Infection due to Capillaria philippinensis
  Excludes:
 hepatic capillariasis (B83.8)
B81.2 Trichostrongyliasis
B81.3 Intestinal angiostrongyliasis
     Includes:
    Angiostrongyliasis due to Angiostrongylus costaricensis
   Angiostrongyliasis due to Parastrongylus costaricensis
B81.4 Mixed intestinal helminthiases
     Includes:
    Infection due to intestinal helminths classifiable to more than one of the categories (B65.0-
   B81.3) and (B81.8)
  Mixed helminthiasis NOS
B81.8 Other specified intestinal helminthiases
     Includes:
    Infection due to:
   •
    Oesophagostomum species [oesophagostomiasis]
   •
    Ternidens deminutus [ternidensiasis]
   •
    Ternidens diminutus [ternidensiasis]
B82
Unspecified intestinal parasitism
B82.0 Intestinal helminthiasis, unspecified
B82.9 Intestinal parasitism, unspecified
B83
Other helminthiases
Excludes:
B83.0
capillariasis:
•
NOS (B81.1)
•
intestinal (B81.1)
Visceral larva migrans
Includes:
Toxocariasis
93
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
B83.1 
B83.1
Gnathostomiasis
Includes:
Wandering swelling
B83.2 Angiostrongyliasis due to Parastrongylus cantonensis
     Includes:
    Angiostrongyliasis due to Angiostrongylus cantonensis
   Eosinophilic meningoencephalitis† (G05.2*)
    Excludes:
   intestinal angiostrongyliasis (B81.3)
B83.3 Syngamiasis
     Includes:
    Syngamosis
B83.4 Internal hirudiniasis
     Excludes:
    external hirudiniasis (B88.3)
B83.8 Other specified helminthiases
     Includes:
    Acanthocephaliasis
   Gongylonemiasis
  Hepatic capillariasis
 Metastrongyliasis
Thelaziasis
B83.9 Helminthiasis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Worms NOS
   Excludes:
  intestinal helminthiasis NOS (B82.0)
94
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
Pediculosis, acariasis and other infestations (B85-B89)
B85
B87.9
Pediculosis and phthiriasis
B85.0 Pediculosis due to Pediculus humanus capitis
     Includes:
    Head-louse infestation
B85.1 Pediculosis due to Pediculus humanus corporis
     Includes:
    Body-louse infestation
B85.2 Pediculosis, unspecified
B85.3 Phthiriasis
     Includes:
    Infestation by:
   •
    crab-louse
   •
    Phthirus pubis
B85.4 Mixed pediculosis and phthiriasis
     Includes:
    Infestation classifiable to more than one of the categories B85.0-B85.3
B86
Scabies
Includes:
B87
Sarcoptic itch
Myiasis
Includes:
infestation by larvae of flies
B87.0 Cutaneous myiasis
     Includes:
    Creeping myiasis
B87.1 Wound myiasis
     Includes:
    Traumatic myiasis
B87.2 Ocular myiasis
B87.3 Nasopharyngeal myiasis
     Includes:
    Laryngeal myiasis
B87.4 Aural myiasis
B87.8 Myiasis of other sites
     Includes:
    Genitourinary myiasis
   Intestinal myiasis
B87.9 Myiasis, unspecified
95
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
B88
B88
Other infestations
B88.0 Other acariasis
     Includes:
    Acarine dermatitis
   Dermatitis due to:
  •
   Demodex species
  •
   Dermanyssus gallinae
  •
   Liponyssoides sanguineus
  Trombiculosis
 Excludes:
scabies (B86)
B88.1 Tungiasis [sandflea infestation]
B88.2 Other arthropod infestations
     Includes:
    Scarabiasis
B88.3 External hirudiniasis
     Includes:
    Leech infestation NOS
   Excludes:
  internal hirudiniasis (B83.4)
B88.8 Other specified infestations
     Includes:
    Ichthyoparasitism due to Vandellia cirrhosa
   Linguatulosis
  Porocephaliasis
B88.9 Infestation, unspecified
     Includes:
    Infestation:
   •
    (skin) NOS
   •
    by mites NOS
   Skin parasites NOS
B89
96
Unspecified parasitic disease
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
Sequelae of infectious and parasitic diseases
(B90-B94)
Note:
Excludes:
B90
B94.9
Categories B90-B94 are to be used to indicate conditions in categories A00-B89 as the cause of sequelae, which
are themselves classified elsewhere. The "sequelae" include conditions specified as such; they also include late
effects of diseases classifiable to the above categories if there is evidence that the disease itself is no longer
present. For use of these categories, reference should be made to the morbidity or mortality coding rules and
guidelines.
Not to be used for chronic infections. Code current infections to chronic or active infectious disease as
appropriate.
postpolio syndrome (G14)
Sequelae of tuberculosis
B90.0 Sequelae of central nervous system tuberculosis
B90.1 Sequelae of genitourinary tuberculosis
B90.2 Sequelae of tuberculosis of bones and joints
B90.8 Sequelae of tuberculosis of other organs
B90.9 Sequelae of respiratory and unspecified tuberculosis
     Includes:
    Sequelae of tuberculosis NOS
B91 Sequelae of poliomyelitis
B92 Sequelae of leprosy
B94 Sequelae of other and unspecified infectious and parasitic diseases
B94.0 Sequelae of trachoma
B94.1 Sequelae of viral encephalitis
B94.2 Sequelae of viral hepatitis
B94.8 Sequelae of other specified infectious and parasitic diseases
B94.9 Sequelae of unspecified infectious or parasitic disease
97
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
B95
Bacterial, viral and other infectious agents
(B95-B97)
Note:
These categories should never be used in primary coding. They are provided for use as supplementary or
additional codes when it is desired to identify the infectious agent(s) in diseases classified elsewhere.
Use additional code to identify resistance to antimicrobial and antineoplastic drugs (U82-U85)
B95
Streptococcus and staphylococcus as the cause of diseases classified to
other chapters
B95.0 Streptococcus, group A, as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B95.1 Streptococcus, group B, as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B95.2 Streptococcus, group D, as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B95.3 Streptococcus pneumoniae as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B95.4 Other streptococcus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B95.40o Streptococcus Group G, as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B95.48o Other streptococcus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
       Excludes:
      Streptococcus faecalis (B96.81)
     Streptococcus faecium (B96.81)
B95.5 Unspecified streptococcus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B95.6 Staphylococcus aureus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B95.7 Other staphylococcus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B95.8 Unspecified staphylococcus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B96
Other bacterial agents as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B96.0 Mycoplasma pneumoniae [M. pneumoniae] as the cause of diseases classified to other
     chapters
    Includes:
   Pleuro-pneumonia-like-organism [PPLO]
B96.1 Klebsiella pneumoniae [K. pneumoniae] as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B96.2 Escherichia coli [E. coli] as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B96.3 Haemophilus influenzae [H. influenzae] as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B96.4 Proteus (mirabilis)(morganii) as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B96.5 Pseudomonas (aeruginosa) as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B96.6 Bacillus fragilis [B. fragilis] as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B96.7 Clostridium perfringens [C. perfringens] as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B96.8 Other specified bacterial agents as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B96.80o Helicobacter pylori [H. pylori] as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B96.81o Enterococcus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
       Includes:
      Streptococcus faecalis
     Streptococcus faecium
B96.88o Other specified bacterial agents as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
       Includes:
      Campylobacter NEC
     Excludes:
    Campylobacter enteritis (A04.5)
98
CERTAIN INFECTIOUS AND PARASITIC DISEASES (A00-B99)
B97
Viral agents as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B97.0 B97.1 Enterovirus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
           Includes:
          Coxsackievirus
         Echovirus
B97.2 Coronavirus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B97.3 Retrovirus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
     Includes:
    Lentivirus
   Oncovirus
B97.4 Respiratory syncytial virus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B97.5 Reovirus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B97.6 Parvovirus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B97.7 Papillomavirus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B97.8 Other viral agents as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B97.80o Parainfluenza virus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B97.81o Human metapneumovirus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
B97.88o 
B99
Adenovirus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
Other viral agents as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
Other infectious diseases (B99)
B99
Other and unspecified infectious diseases
99
I
CHAPTER II
Neoplasms
(C00-D48)
Notes
1. Primary, ill-defined, secondary and unspecified sites of malignant neoplasms
Categories C76-C80 include malignant neoplasms for which there is no clear indication of the original site of the cancer or the
cancer is stated to be "disseminated", "scattered" or "spread" without mention of the primary site. In both cases the primary site is
considered to be unknown.
2. Functional activity
All neoplasms are classified in this chapter, whether they are functionally active or not. An additional code from Chapter IV may
be used, if desired, to identify functional activity associated with any neoplasm. For example, catecholamine-producing malignant
phaeochromocytoma of adrenal gland should be coded to C74 with additional code E27.5; basophil adenoma of pituitary gland with
Cushing's syndrome should be coded to D35.2 with additional code E24.0.
3. Morphology
There are a number of major morphological (histological) groups of malignant neoplasms: carcinomas including squamous (cell)
and adeno-carcinomas; sarcomas; other soft tissue tumours including mesotheliomas; lymphomas (Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's);
leukaemia; other specified and site-specific types; and unspecified cancers. Cancer is a generic term and may be used for any of the
above groups, although it is rarely applied to the malignant neoplasms of lymphatic, haematopoietic and related tissue. "Carcinoma"
is sometimes used incorrectly as a synonym for "cancer".
In Chapter II neoplasms are classified predominantly by site within broad groupings for behaviour. In a few exceptional cases
morphology is indicated in the category and subcategory titles.
For those wishing to identify the histological type of neoplasm, comprehensive separate morphology codes are provided in Chapter
XXII Morphology of Neoplasms. These morphology codes are derived from the second edition of International Classification of
Diseases for Oncology (ICD-O), which is a dual-axis classification providing independent coding systems for topography and
morphology. Morphology codes have six digits: the first four digits identify the histological type; the fifth digit is the behaviour
code (malignant primary, malignant secondary (metastatic), in situ, benign, uncertain whether malignant or benign); and the sixth
digit is a grading code (differentiation) for solid tumours, and is also used as a special code for lymphomas and leukaemias.
4. Use of subcategories in Chapter II
Attention is drawn to the special use of subcategory .8 in this chapter [see note 5]. Where it has been necessary to provide
subcategories for "other", these have generally been designated as subcategory .7.
5. Malignant neoplasms overlapping site boundaries and the use of sub-category .8
(overlapping lesion)
Categories C00-C75 classify primary malignant neoplasms according to their point of origin. Many three-character categories are
further divided into named parts or subcategories of the organ in question. A neoplasm that overlaps two or more contiguous sites
within a three-character category and whose point of origin cannot be determined should be classified to the subcategory .8
("overlapping lesion"), unless the combination is specifically indexed elsewhere. For example, carcinoma of oesophagus and
stomach is specifically indexed to C16.0 (cardia), while carcinoma of the tip and ventral surface of the tongue should be assigned
to C02.8. On the other hand, carcinoma of the tip of the tongue extending to involve the ventral surface should be coded to C02.1
as the point of origin, the tip, is known. "Over-lapping" implies that the sites involved are contiguous (next to each other).
Numerically consecutive subcategories are frequently anatomically contiguous, but this is not invariably so (e.g. bladder C67.-) and
the coder may need to consult anatomical texts to determine the topographical relationships.
Sometimes a neoplasm overlaps the boundaries of three-character categories within certain systems. To take care of this the
following subcategories have been designated:
C02.8 Overlapping lesion of tongue
C08.8 Overlapping lesion of major salivary glands
C14.8 Overlapping lesion of lip, oral cavity and pharynx
C21.8 Overlapping lesion of rectum, anus and anal canal
C24.8 Overlapping lesion of biliary tract,
C26.8 Overlapping lesion of digestive system
101
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C39.8 Overlapping lesion of respiratory and intrathoracic organs
C41.8 Overlapping lesion of bone and articular cartilage
C49.8 Overlapping lesion of connective and soft tissue
C57.8 Overlapping lesion of female genital organs
C63.8 Overlapping lesion of male genital organs
C68.8 Overlapping lesion of urinary organs
C72.8 Overlapping lesion of central nervous system
An example of this is a carcinoma of the stomach and small intestine, which should be coded to C26.8 (Overlapping lesion of
digestive system).
6. Malignant neoplasms of ectopic tissue
Malignant neoplasms of ectopic tissue are to be coded to the site mentioned, e.g. ectopic pancreatic malignant neoplasms are coded
to pancreas, unspecified (C25.9).
7. Use of the Alphabetical Index in coding neoplasms.
In addition to site, morphology and behaviour must also be taken into consideration when coding neoplasms, and reference should
always be made first to the Alphabetical Index entry for the morphological description.
The introductory pages of Volume 3 include general instructions about the correct use of the Alphabetical Index. The specific
instructions and examples pertaining to neoplasms should be consulted to ensure correct use of the categories and subcategories in
Chapter II.
8. Use of the second edition of International Classification of Diseases for Oncology
(ICD-O)
For certain morphological types, Chapter II provides a rather restricted topographical classification, or none at all. The topography
codes of ICD-O use for all neoplasms essentially the same three- and four-character categories that Chapter II uses for malignant
neoplasms (C00-C77, C80.-), thus providing increased specificity of site for other neoplasms (malignant secondary (metastatic),
benign, in situ and uncertain or unknown).
It is therefore recommended that agencies interested in identifying both the site and morphology of tumours, e.g. cancer registries,
cancer hospitals, pathology departments and other agencies specializing in cancer, use ICD-O.
This chapter contains the following blocks:
C00-C14
C00-C75
C00-C97
C15-C26
C30-C39
C40-C41
C43-C44
C45-C49
C50-C50
C51-C58
C60-C63
C64-C68
C69-C72
C73-C75
C76-C80
C81-C96
C97-C97
D00-D09
D10-D36
D37-D48
102
Malignant neoplasms of lip, oral cavity and pharynx
Malignant neoplasms, stated or presumed to be primary, of specified sites, except of lymphoid,
haematopoietic and related tissue
Malignant neoplasms
Malignant neoplasms of digestive organs
Malignant neoplasms of respiratory and intrathoracic organs
Malignant neoplasms of bone and articular cartilage
Melanoma and other malignant neoplasms of skin
Malignant neoplasms of mesothelial and soft tissue
Malignant neoplasm of breast (C50)
Malignant neoplasms of female genital organs
Malignant neoplasms of male genital organs
Malignant neoplasms of urinary tract
Malignant neoplasms of eye, brain and other parts of central nervous system
Malignant neoplasms of thyroid and other endocrine glands
Malignant neoplasms of ill-defined, secondary and unspecified sites
Malignant neoplasms of lymphoid, haematopoietic and related tissue
Malignant neoplasms of independent (primary) multiple sites (C97)
In situ neoplasms
Benign neoplasms
Neoplasms of uncertain or unknown behaviour
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
Malignant neoplasms
(C00-C97)
C00.9
Malignant neoplasms, stated or presumed to be primary, of specified
sites, except of lymphoid, haematopoietic and related tissue
(C00-C75)
Malignant neoplasms of lip, oral cavity and pharynx
(C00-C14)
C00
Malignant neoplasm of lip
Excludes:
skin of lip (C43.0, C44.0)
C00.0 Malignant neoplasm of external upper lip
     Includes:
    Upper lip:
   •
    NOS
   •
    lipstick area
   •
    vermilion border
C00.1 Malignant neoplasm of external lower lip
     Includes:
    Lower lip:
   •
    NOS
   •
    lipstick area
   •
    vermilion border
C00.2 Malignant neoplasm external lip unspecified
     Includes:
    Vermilion border NOS
C00.3 Malignant neoplasm upper lip inner aspect
     Includes:
    Upper lip:
   •
    buccal aspect
   •
    frenulum
   •
    mucosa
   •
    oral aspect
C00.4 Malignant neoplasm lower lip, inner aspect
     Includes:
    Lower lip:
   •
    buccal aspect
   •
    frenulum
   •
    mucosa
   •
    oral aspect
C00.5 Malignant neoplasm lip, unspecified, inner aspect
     Includes:
    Lip, not specified whether upper or lower:
   •
    buccal aspect
   •
    frenulum
   •
    mucosa
   •
    oral aspect
C00.6 Malignant neoplasm of commissure of lip
C00.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of lip
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning ofChapter II]
C00.9 Malignant neoplasm of lip unspecified
103
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C01
Malignant neoplasm of base of tongue
Includes:
C01
C02
Dorsal surface of base
Fixed part of tongue NOS
Posterior third of tongue
Malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified parts of tongue
C02.0 Malignant neoplasm dorsal surface of tongue
     Includes:
    Anterior two-thirds of tongue, dorsal surface
   Excludes:
  dorsal surface of base of tongue (C01)
C02.1 Malignant neoplasm of border of tongue
     Includes:
    Tip of tongue
C02.2 Malignant neoplasm ventral surface of tongue
     Includes:
    Anterior two-thirds of tongue, ventral surface
   Frenulum linguae
C02.3 Malignant neoplasm anterior two-thirds of tongue, part unspecified
     Includes:
    Middle third of tongue NOS
   Mobile part of tongue NOS
C02.4 Malignant neoplasm of lingual tonsil
     Excludes:
    tonsil NOS (C09.9)
C02.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of tongue
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Malignant neoplasm of tongue whose point of origin cannot be classified to any one of the
 categories C01-C02.4
C02.9 Malignant neoplasm tongue unspecified
C03
Malignant neoplasm of gum
Includes:
Excludes:
alveolar (ridge) mucosa
gingiva
malignant odontogenic neoplasms (C41.0-C41.1)
C03.0 Malignant neoplasm of upper gum
C03.1 Malignant neoplasm of lower gum
C03.9 Malignant neoplasm of gum unspecified
C04
Malignant neoplasm of floor of mouth
C04.0 Malignant neoplasm anterior floor of mouth
     Includes:
    Anterior to the premolar-canine junction
C04.1 Malignant neoplasm lateral floor of mouth
C04.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of floor of mouth
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C04.9 Malignant neoplasm floor of mouth, unspecified
C05
Malignant neoplasm of palate
C05.0 Malignant neoplasm of hard palate
C05.1 Malignant neoplasm of soft palate
     Excludes:
    nasopharyngeal surface of soft palate (C11.3)
C05.2 Malignant neoplasm of uvula
C05.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of palate
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
104
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
C05.9
C06
Malignant neoplasm of palate unspecified
Includes:
Roof of mouth
C10.0
Malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified parts of mouth
C06.0 Malignant neoplasm of cheek mucosa
     Includes:
    Buccal mucosa NOS
   Internal cheek
C06.1 Malignant neoplasm of vestibule of mouth
     Includes:
    Buccal sulcus (upper)(lower)
   Labial sulcus (upper)(lower)
C06.2 Malignant neoplasm of retromolar area
C06.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of other and unspecified parts of mouth
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C06.9 Malignant neoplasm of mouth unspecified
     Includes:
    Minor salivary gland, unspecified site
   Oral cavity NOS
C07 Malignant neoplasm of parotid gland
C08 Malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified major salivary glands
Excludes:
malignant neoplasms of:
•
minor salivary glands NOS (C06.9)
•
specified minor salivary which are classified according to their anatomical location
parotid gland (C07)
C08.0 Malignant neoplasm submandibular gland
     Includes:
    Submaxillary gland
C08.1 Malignant neoplasm of sublingual gland
C08.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of major salivary glands
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Malignant neoplasm of major salivary glands whose point of origin cannot be classified to any
 one of the categories C07-C08.1
C08.9 Malignant neoplasm major salivary gland, unspecified
     Includes:
    Salivary gland (major) NOS
C09
Malignant neoplasm of tonsil
Excludes:
lingual tonsil (C02.4)
pharyngeal tonsil (C11.1)
C09.0 Malignant neoplasm of tonsillar fossa
C09.1 Malignant neoplasm tonsillar pillar (anterior)(posterior)
C09.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of tonsil
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C09.9 Malignant neoplasm tonsil unspecified
     Includes:
    Tonsil:
   •
    NOS
   •
    faucial
   •
    palatine
C10
Malignant neoplasm of oropharynx
Excludes:
C10.0
tonsil (C09.-)
Malignant neoplasm of vallecula
105
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C10.1 Malignant neoplasm anterior surface of epiglottis
     Includes:
    Epiglottis, free border [margin]
   Glossoepiglottic fold(s)
  Excludes:
 epiglottis (suprahyoid portion) NOS (C32.1)
C10.2 Malignant neoplasm lateral wall oropharynx
C10.3 Malignant neoplasm posterior wall of oropharynx
C10.4 Malignant neoplasm of branchial cleft
     Includes:
    Branchial cyst [site of neoplasm]
C10.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of oropharynx
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Junctional region of oropharynx
C10.9 Malignant lesion oropharynx unspecified
C10.1
C11
Malignant neoplasm of nasopharynx
C11.0 Malignant neoplasm superior wall of nasopharynx
     Includes:
    Roof of nasopharynx
C11.1 Malignant neoplasm posterior wall of nasopharynx
     Includes:
    Adenoid
   Pharyngeal tonsil
C11.2 Malignant neoplasm lateral wall nasopharynx
     Includes:
    Fossa of Rosenmüller
    Opening of:
   •
    auditory tube
   •
    eustachian tube
   Pharyngeal recess
C11.3 Malignant neoplasm of anterior wall nasopharynx
     Includes:
    Floor of nasopharynx
   Nasopharyngeal (anterior)(posterior) surface of soft palate
  Posterior margin of nasal:
 •
  choana
 •
  septum
C11.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of nasopharynx
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C11.9 Malignant neoplasm nasopharynx unspecified
     Includes:
    Nasopharyngeal wall NOS
C12 Malignant neoplasm of pyriform sinus
Includes:
C13
Pyriform fossa
Malignant neoplasm of hypopharynx
Excludes:
pyriform sinus (C12)
C13.0 Malignant neoplasm of postcricoid region
C13.1 Malignant neoplasm aryepiglottic fold, hypopharyngeal aspect
     Includes:
    Aryepiglottic fold:
   •
    NOS
   •
    marginal zone
   Excludes:
  aryepiglottic fold, laryngeal aspect (C32.1)
C13.2 Malignant neoplasm posterior wall of hypopharynx
C13.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of hypopharynx
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
106
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
C13.9
C14
Malignant lesion hypopharynx unspecified
Includes:
Hypopharyngeal wall NOS
C16.5
Malignant neoplasm of other and ill-defined sites in the lip, oral cavity and
pharynx
Excludes:
oral cavity NOS (C06.9)
C14.0 Malignant neoplasm pharynx unspecified
C14.2 Malignant neoplasm of Waldeyer's ring
C14.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of lip, oral cavity and pharynx
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Malignant neoplasm of lip, oral cavity and pharynx whose point of origin cannot be classified to
 any one of the categories C00-C14.2
Malignant neoplasms of digestive organs
(C15-C26)
C15
Malignant neoplasm of oesophagus
Note:
Two alternative subclassifications are given:
.0-.2 by anatomical description
.3-.5 by thirds.
This departure from the principle that categories should be mutually exclusive is deliberate,
since both forms of terminology are in use but the resulting anatomical divisions are not
analogous.
C15.0 Malignant neoplasm cervical oesophagus
C15.1 Malignant neoplasm thoracic oesophagus
C15.2 Malignant neoplasm abdominal oesophagus
C15.3 Malignant neoplasm upper third oesophagus
C15.4 Malignant neoplasm middle third of oesophagus
C15.5 Malignant neoplasm lower third of oesophagus
C15.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of oesophagus
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C15.9 Malignant lesion oesophagus unspecified
C16
Malignant neoplasm of stomach
C16.0 Malignant neoplasm of cardia
     Includes:
    Cardiac orifice
   Cardio-oesophageal junction
  Gastro-oesophageal junction
 Oesophagus and stomach
C16.1 Malignant neoplasm of fundus of stomach
C16.2 Malignant neoplasm of body of stomach
C16.3 Malignant neoplasm of pyloric antrum
     Includes:
    Gastric antrum
C16.4 Malignant neoplasm of pylorus
     Includes:
    Prepylorus
   Pyloric canal
C16.5 Malignant neoplasm lesser curvature of stomach, unspecified
     Includes:
    Lesser curvature of stomach, not classifiable to C16.1-C16.4
107
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C16.6 
C16.6
Malignant neoplasm greater curvature of stomach, unspecified
Includes:
Greater curvature of stomach, not classifiable to C16.0-C16.4
C16.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of stomach
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C16.9 Malignant neoplasm stomach unspecified
     Includes:
    Gastric cancer NOS
C17
Malignant neoplasm of small intestine
C17.0 Malignant neoplasm of duodenum
C17.1 Malignant neoplasm of jejunum
C17.2 Malignant neoplasm of ileum
     Excludes:
    ileocaecal valve (C18.0)
C17.3 Malignant neoplasm Meckel's diverticulum
C17.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of small intestine
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C17.9 Malignant lesion small intestine unspecified
C18
Malignant neoplasm of colon
C18.0 Malignant neoplasm of caecum
     Includes:
    Ileocaecal valve
C18.1 Malignant neoplasm of appendix
C18.2 Malignant neoplasm of ascending colon
C18.3 Malignant neoplasm of hepatic flexure
C18.4 Malignant neoplasm of transverse colon
C18.5 Malignant neoplasm of splenic flexure
C18.6 Malignant neoplasm of descending colon
C18.7 Malignant neoplasm of sigmoid colon
     Includes:
    Sigmoid (flexure)
   Excludes:
  rectosigmoid junction (C19)
C18.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of colon
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C18.9 Malignant neoplasm colon, unspecified
     Includes:
    Large intestine NOS
C19
Malignant neoplasm of rectosigmoid junction
Includes:
C20
Malignant neoplasm of rectum
Includes:
C21
C21.0
108
Colon with rectum
Pelvic peritoneal reflection
Rectosigmoid (colon)
Rectal ampulla
Malignant neoplasm of anus and anal canal
Malignant neoplasm of anus unspecified
Excludes:
anal:
•
margin (C43.5, C44.5)
•
skin (C43.5, C44.5)
perianal skin (C43.5, C44.5)
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
C21.1 Malignant neoplasm of anal canal
     Includes:
    Anal sphincter
C21.2 Malignant neoplasm of cloacogenic zone
C21.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of rectum, anus and anal canal
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Anorectal junction
 Anorectum
Malignant neoplasm of rectum, anus and anal canal whose point of origin cannot be classified
to any one of the categories C20-C21.2
C22
C25.4
Malignant neoplasm of liver and intrahepatic bile ducts
Excludes:
biliary tract NOS (C24.9)
secondary malignant neoplasm of liver (C78.7)
C22.0 Liver cell carcinoma
     Includes:
    Hepatocellular carcinoma
   Hepatoma
C22.1 Intrahepatic bile duct carcinoma
     Includes:
    Cholangiocarcinoma
C22.2 Hepatoblastoma
C22.3 Angiosarcoma of liver
     Includes:
    Kupffer cell sarcoma
C22.4 Other sarcomas of liver
C22.7 Other specified carcinomas of liver
C22.9 Malignant neoplasm of liver unspecified
C23 Malignant neoplasm of gallbladder
C24 Malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified parts of biliary tract
Excludes:
intrahepatic bile duct (C22.1)
C24.0 Malignant neoplasm extrahepatic bile duct
     Includes:
    Biliary duct or passage NOS
   Common bile duct
  Cystic duct
 Hepatic duct
C24.1 Malignant neoplasm ampulla of Vater
C24.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of biliary tract
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Malignant neoplasm:
 •
  involving both intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts
 •
  of biliary tract whose point of origin cannot be classified to any one of the categories C22.0-
 C24.1
C24.9 Malignant lesion biliary tract unspecified
C25
Malignant neoplasm of pancreas
C25.0 Malignant neoplasm of head of pancreas
C25.1 Malignant neoplasm of body of pancreas
C25.2 Malignant neoplasm of tail of pancreas
C25.3 Malignant neoplasm of pancreatic duct
C25.4 Malignant neoplasm of endocrine pancreas
     Includes:
    Islets of Langerhans
109
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C25.7 
C25.7
Malignant neoplasm other parts pancreas
Includes:
Neck of pancreas
C25.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of pancreas
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C25.9 Malignant neoplasm pancreas part unspecified
C26
Malignant neoplasm of other and ill-defined digestive organs
Excludes:
peritoneum and retroperitoneum (C48.-)
C26.0 Malignant neoplasm intestinal tract, part unspecified
     Includes:
    Intestine NOS
C26.1 Malignant neoplasm of spleen
     Excludes:
    Hodgkin's disease (C81.-)
   non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (C82-C85)
C26.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of digestive system
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Malignant neoplasm of digestive organs whose point of origin cannot be classified to any one of
 the categories C15-C26.1
Excludes:
cardio-oesophageal junction (C16.0)
C26.9 Malignant neoplasms of other & Ill-defined sites within the digestive system
     Includes:
    Alimentary canal or tract NOS
   Gastrointestinal tract NOS
Malignant neoplasms of respiratory and intrathoracic organs
(C30-C39)
Includes:
Excludes:
C30
middle ear
mesothelioma (C45.-)
Malignant neoplasm of nasal cavity and middle ear
C30.0 Malignant neoplasm of nasal cavity
     Excludes:
    nasal bone (C41.0)
   nose NOS (C76.0)
  olfactory bulb (C72.2)
 posterior margin of nasal septum and choana (C11.3)
skin of nose (C43.3, C44.3)
C30.00o Malignant neoplasm of vestibule of nose
C30.01o Malignant neoplasm of other parts of nasal cavity
       Includes:
      Cartilage of nose
     Concha, nasal
    Internal nose
   Septum of nose
C30.1 Malignant neoplasm of middle ear
     Includes:
    Eustachian tube
   Inner ear
  Mastoid air cells
 Excludes:
auricular canal (external) (C43.2, C44.2)
bone of ear (meatus) (C41.0)
cartilage of ear (C49.0)
opening of eustachian tube (C11.2)
skin of (external) ear (C43.2, C44.2)
110
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
C31
Malignant neoplasm of accessory sinuses
C31.0 C31.1 Malignant neoplasm of ethmoidal sinus
C31.2 Malignant neoplasm of frontal sinus
C31.3 Malignant neoplasm of sphenoidal sinus
C31.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of accessory sinuses
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C31.9 
C34.30o
Malignant neoplasm of maxillary sinus
Includes:
Antrum (Highmore)(maxillary)
Malignant neoplasm accessory sinus unspecified
C32
Malignant neoplasm of larynx
C32.0 Malignant neoplasm of glottis
     Includes:
    Intrinsic larynx
   Vocal cord (true) NOS
C32.1 Malignant neoplasm of supraglottis
     Includes:
    Aryepiglottic fold, laryngeal aspect
   Epiglottis (suprahyoid portion) NOS
  Extrinsic larynx
 False vocal cord
Posterior (laryngeal) surface of epiglottis
Ventricular bands
Excludes:
anterior surface of epiglottis (C10.1)
aryepiglottic fold:
•
 NOS (C13.1)
•
 hypopharyngeal aspect (C13.1)
•
 marginal zone (C13.1)
C32.2 Malignant neoplasm of subglottis
C32.3 Malignant neoplasm laryngeal cartilage
C32.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of larynx
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C32.9 Malignant neoplasm larynx unspecified
C33 Malignant neoplasm of trachea
C34 Malignant neoplasm of bronchus and lung
C34.0 Malignant neoplasm of main bronchus
     Includes:
    Carina
   Hilus (of lung)
C34.00o Malignant neoplasm of right main bronchus
C34.01o Malignant neoplasm of left main bronchus
C34.09o Malignant neoplasm of main bronchus, unspecified side
C34.1 Malignant neoplasm upper lobe, bronchus or lung
C34.10o Malignant neoplasm of upper lobe, right bronchus or lung
C34.11o Malignant neoplasm upper lobe, left bronchus or lung
C34.19o Malignant neoplasm of upper lobe, bronchus or lung, unspecified side
C34.2 Malignant neoplasm middle lobe, bronchus or lung
C34.3 Malignant neoplasm lower lobe, bronchus or lung
C34.30o Malignant neoplasm of lower lobe, right bronchus or lung
111
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C34.31o 
C34.31o
Malignant neoplasm of lower lobe, left bronchus or lung
C34.39o Malignant neoplasm of lower lobe, bronchus or lung, unspecified side
C34.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of bronchus and lung
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C34.80o Malignant neoplasm of overlapping lesion of right bronchus and lung
C34.81o Malignant neoplasm of overlapping lesion of left bronchus and lung
C34.89o Malignant neoplasm of overlapping lesion of bronchus and lung, unspecified side
C34.9 Malignant neoplasm bronchus or lung unspecified
C34.90o Malignant neoplasm of right bronchus or lung unspecified
C34.91o Malignant neoplasm left bronchus or lung, unspecified
C34.99o Malignant neoplasm bronchus or lung, unspecified, unspecified side
C37 Malignant neoplasm of thymus
C38 Malignant neoplasm of heart, mediastinum and pleura
Excludes:
mesothelioma (C45.-)
C38.0 Malignant neoplasm of heart
     Includes:
    Atrium
   Endocardium
  Myocardium
 Pericardium
Excludes:
great vessels (C49.3)
C38.1 Malignant neoplasm anterior mediastinum
C38.2 Malignant neoplasm posterior mediastinum
C38.3 Malignant neoplasm mediastinum, part unspecified
C38.4 Malignant neoplasm of pleura
C38.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of heart, mediastinum and pleura
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C39
Malignant neoplasm of other and ill-defined sites in the respiratory system
and intrathoracic organs
Excludes:
intrathoracic NOS (C76.1)
thoracic NOS (C76.1)
C39.0 Malignant neoplasm upper respiratory tract, part unspecified
C39.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of respiratory and intrathoracic organs
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Malignant neoplasm of respiratory and intrathoracic organs whose point of origin cannot be
 classified to any one of the categories C30-C39.0
C39.9 Malignant neoplasm of other ill-defined sites within the respiratory system
     Includes:
    Respiratory tract NOS
112
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
Malignant neoplasms of bone and articular cartilage
(C40-C41)
Excludes:
C40
C41.1
bone marrow NOS (C96.7)
synovia (C49.-)
Malignant neoplasm of bone and articular cartilage of limbs
C40.0 Malignant neoplasm scapula and long bones of upper limb
C40.1 Malignant neoplasm short bones of upper limb
C40.2 Malignant neoplasm long bones of lower limb
C40.3 Malignant neoplasm short bones of lower limb
C40.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of bone and articular cartilage of limbs
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C40.9 Malignant neoplasm bone and articular cartilage of limb, unspecified
C41
Malignant neoplasm of bone and articular cartilage of other and unspecified
sites
Excludes:
bones of limbs (C40.-)
cartilage of:
•
ear (C49.0)
•
larynx (C32.3)
•
limbs (C40.-)
•
nose (C30.0)
C41.0 Malignant neoplasm bones of skull and face
     Excludes:
    carcinoma, any type except intraosseous or odontogenic of:
   •
    maxillary sinus (C31.0)
   •
    upper jaw (C03.0)
   jaw bone (lower) (C41.1)
C41.00o Malignant neoplasm of craniofacial bones
       Includes:
      Bone:
     •
      Ethmoid
     •
      Frontal
     •
      Occipital
     •
      Orbital
     •
      Parietal
     •
      Sphenoid
     •
      Temporal
C41.01o Malignant neoplasm of maxillofacial bones
       Includes:
      Bone:
     •
      Face (NOS)
     •
      Malar
     •
      Maxilla (superior)
     •
      Nasal
     •
      Turbinate
     •
      Upper jaw
     •
      Vomer
     •
      Zygomatic
C41.1 Malignant neoplasm of mandible
     Includes:
    Lower jaw bone
   Temporomandibular joint
  Excludes:
 carcinoma, any type except intraosseous or odontogenic of:
•
 jaw NOS (C03.9)
•
 lower (C03.1)
upper jaw bone (C41.0)
113
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C41.2 
C41.2
Malignant neoplasm of vertebral column
Excludes:
sacrum and coccyx (C41.4)
C41.3 Malignant neoplasm ribs sternum clavicle
C41.4 Malignant neoplasm pelvic bones, sacrum and coccyx
C41.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of bone and articular cartilage
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Malignant neoplasm of bone and articular cartilage whose point of origin cannot be classified to
 any one of the categories C40-C41.4
C41.9 Malignant neoplasm bone and articular cartilage, unspecified
Melanoma and other malignant neoplasms of skin
(C43-C44)
C43
Malignant melanoma of skin
Includes:
Excludes:
morphology codes 872-879 with behaviour code /3
malignant melanoma of skin of genital organs (C51-C52, C60.-, C63.-)
C43.0 Malignant melanoma of lip
     Excludes:
    vermilion border of lip (C00.0-C00.2)
C43.1 Malignant melanoma of eyelid, including canthus
C43.2 Malignant melanoma of ear and external auricular canal
C43.3 Malignant melanoma of other and unspecified parts of face
C43.4 Malignant melanoma of scalp and neck
C43.5 Malignant melanoma of trunk
     Includes:
    Anal:
   •
    margin
   •
    skin
   Perianal skin
  Skin of breast
 Excludes:
anus NOS (C21.0)
C43.6 Malignant melanoma of upper limb, including shoulder
C43.7 Malignant melanoma of lower limb, including hip
C43.8 Overlapping malignant melanoma of skin
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C43.9 Malignant melanoma of skin, unspecified
     Includes:
    Melanoma (malignant) NOS
C44
Other malignant neoplasms of skin
Includes:
Excludes:
malignant neoplasm of:
•
sebaceous glands
•
sweat glands
Kaposi's sarcoma (C46.-)
malignant melanoma of skin (C43.-)
skin of genital organs (C51-C52, C60.-, C63.-)
C44.0 Malignant neoplasm of skin of lip
     Includes:
    Basal cell carcinoma of lip
   Excludes:
  malignant neoplasm of lip (C00.-)
C44.1 Malignant neoplasm skin of eyelid, including canthus
     Excludes:
    connective tissue of eyelid (C49.0)
C44.2 Malignant neoplasm skin of ear and external auricular canal
     Excludes:
    connective tissue of ear (C49.0)
114
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
C44.3 Malignant neoplasm skin of other and unspecified parts of face
C44.4 Malignant neoplasm skin of scalp & neck
C44.5 Malignant neoplasm of skin of trunk
     Includes:
    Anal:
   •
    margin
   •
    skin
   Perianal skin
  Skin of breast
 Excludes:
anus NOS (C21.0)
C44.6 Malignant neoplasm skin of upper limb, including shoulder
C44.7 Malignant neoplasm skin of lower limb, including hip
C44.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of skin
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C44.9 Malignant neoplasm of skin, unspecified
C46.9
Malignant neoplasms of mesothelial and soft tissue
(C45-C49)
C45
Mesothelioma
Includes:
morphology code 905 with behaviour code /3
C45.0 Mesothelioma of pleura
     Excludes:
    other malignant neoplasms of pleura (C38.4)
C45.1 Mesothelioma of peritoneum
     Includes:
    Mesentery
   Mesocolon
  Omentum
 Peritoneum (parietal)(pelvic)
Excludes:
other malignant neoplasms of peritoneum (C48.-)
C45.2 Mesothelioma of pericardium
     Excludes:
    other malignant neoplasms of pericardium (C38.0)
C45.7 Mesothelioma of other sites
C45.9 Mesothelioma, unspecified
C46
Kaposi's sarcoma
Includes:
morphology code 9140 with behaviour code /3
C46.0 Kaposi's sarcoma of skin
C46.1 Kaposi's sarcoma of soft tissue
C46.2 Kaposi's sarcoma of palate
C46.3 Kaposi's sarcoma of lymph nodes
C46.7 Kaposi's sarcoma of other sites
C46.70o Kaposi's sarcoma of gastrointestinal sites
C46.71o Kaposi's sarcoma of lung
C46.78o Kaposi's sarcoma of other sites
C46.8 Kaposi's sarcoma of multiple organs
C46.9 Kaposi's sarcoma, unspecified
115
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C47
Malignant neoplasm of peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system
Includes:
C47
sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves and ganglia
C47.0 Malignant neoplasm of peripheral nerves of head, face and neck
     Excludes:
    peripheral nerves of orbit (C69.6)
C47.1 Malignant neoplasm of peripheral nerves of upper limb, including shoulder
C47.2 Malignant neoplasm of peripheral nerves of lower limb, including hip
C47.3 Malignant neoplasm of peripheral nerves of thorax
C47.4 Malignant neoplasm of peripheral nerves of abdomen
C47.5 Malignant neoplasm of peripheral nerves of pelvis
C47.6 Malignant neoplasm of peripheral nerves of trunk, unspecified
C47.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C47.9 Malignant neoplasm of peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system, unspecified
C48
Malignant neoplasm of retroperitoneum and peritoneum
Excludes:
Kaposi's sarcoma (C46.1)
mesothelioma (C45.-)
C48.0 Malignant neoplasm of retroperitoneum
C48.1 Malignant neoplasm of specified parts of peritoneum
     Includes:
    Mesentery
   Mesocolon
  Omentum
 Peritoneum:
•
 parietal
•
 pelvic
C48.2 Malignant neoplasm peritoneum unspecified
C48.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of retroperitoneum and peritoneum
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C49
Malignant neoplasm of other connective and soft tissue
Includes:
Excludes:
116
blood vessel
bursa
cartilage
fascia
fat
ligament, except uterine
lymphatic vessel
muscle
synovia
tendon (sheath)
cartilage (of):
•
articular (C40-C41)
•
larynx (C32.3)
•
nose (C30.0)
connective tissue of breast (C50.-)
Kaposi's sarcoma (C46.-)
mesothelioma (C45.-)
peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system (C47.-)
peritoneum (C48.-)
retroperitoneum (C48.0)
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
C49.0
Malignant neoplasm of connective and soft tissue of head, face and neck
Includes:
Connective tissue of:
•
ear
•
eyelid
Excludes:
connective tissue of orbit (C69.6)
C49.1 Malignant neoplasm of connective and soft tissue of upper limb, including shoulder
C49.2 Malignant neoplasm of connective and soft tissue of lower limb, including hip
C49.3 Malignant neoplasm of connective and soft tissue of thorax
     Includes:
    Axilla
   Diaphragm
  Great vessels
 Excludes:
breast (C50.-)
heart (C38.0)
mediastinum (C38.1-C38.3)
thymus (C37)
C49.4 Malignant neoplasm of connective and soft tissue of abdomen
     Includes:
    Abdominal wall
   Hypochondrium
C49.5 Malignant neoplasm of connective and soft tissue of pelvis
     Includes:
    Buttock
   Groin
  Perineum
C49.6 Malignant neoplasm of connective and soft tissue of trunk, unspecified
     Includes:
    Back NOS
C49.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of connective and soft tissue
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Malignant neoplasm of connective and soft tissue whose point of origin cannot be classified to
 any one of the categories C47-C49.6
C49.9 
C50.29o
Malignant neoplasm of connective and soft tissue, unspecified
Malignant neoplasm of breast
(C50)
C50
Malignant neoplasm of breast
Includes:
Excludes:
connective tissue of breast
skin of breast (C43.5, C44.5)
C50.0 Malignant neoplasm of nipple and areola
C50.00o Malignant neoplasm of right nipple and areola
C50.01o Malignant neoplasm of left nipple and areola
C50.09o Malignant neoplasm of nipple and areola, unspecified side
C50.1 Malignant neoplasm of central portion of breast
C50.10o Malignant neoplasm of central portion of right breast
C50.11o Malignant neoplasm of central portion of left breast
C50.19o Malignant neoplasm of central portion of breast, unspecified side
C50.2 Malignant neoplasm of upper-inner quadrant of breast
C50.20o Malignant neoplasm of upper-inner quadrant of right breast
C50.21o Malignant neoplasm of upper-inner quadrant of left breast
C50.29o Malignant neoplasm of upper-inner quadrant of breast, unspecified side
117
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C50.3 
C50.3
Malignant neoplasm of lower-inner quadrant of breast
C50.30o Malignant neoplasm of lower-inner quadrant of right breast
C50.31o Malignant neoplasm of lower-inner quadrant of left breast
C50.39o Malignant neoplasm of lower-inner quadrant of breast, unspecified side
C50.4 Malignant neoplasm of upper-outer quadrant of breast
C50.40o Malignant neoplasm of upper-outer quadrant of right breast
C50.41o Malignant neoplasm of upper-outer quadrant of left breast
C50.49o Malignant neoplasm of upper-outer quadrant of breast, unspecified side
C50.5 Malignant neoplasm of lower-outer quadrant of breast
C50.50o Malignant neoplasm of lower-outer quadrant of right breast
C50.51o Malignant neoplasm of lower-outer quadrant of left breast
C50.59o Malignant neoplasm of lower-outer quadrant of breast, unspecified side
C50.6 Malignant neoplasm of axillary tail of breast
C50.60o Malignant neoplasm of axillary tail of right breast
C50.61o Malignant neoplasm of axillary tail of left breast
C50.69o Malignant neoplasm of axillary tail of breast, unspecified side
C50.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of breast
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C50.80o Overlapping malignant lesion of right breast
C50.81o Overlapping malignant lesion of left breast
C50.89o Overlapping malignant lesion of breast, unspecified side
C50.9 Malignant neoplasm breast part unspecified
C50.90o Malignant neoplasm of right breast, part unspecified
C50.91o Malignant neoplasm of left breast, part unspecified
C50.99o Malignant neoplasm of breast, part unspecified, unspecified side
Malignant neoplasms of female genital organs
(C51-C58)
Includes:
C51
skin of female genital organs
Malignant neoplasm of vulva
C51.0 Malignant neoplasm of labium majus
     Includes:
    Bartholin's [greater vestibular] gland
C51.1 Malignant neoplasm of labium minus
C51.2 Malignant neoplasm of clitoris
C51.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of vulva
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C51.9 Malignant neoplasm of vulva unspecified
     Includes:
    External female genitalia NOS
   Pudendum
C52 Malignant neoplasm of vagina
C53 Malignant neoplasm of cervix uteri
C53.0
118
Malignant neoplasm of endocervix
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
C53.1 Malignant neoplasm of exocervix
C53.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of cervix uteri
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C53.9 Malignant neoplasm cervix uteri, unspecified
C54
C57.9
Malignant neoplasm of corpus uteri
C54.0 Malignant neoplasm of isthmus uteri
     Includes:
    Lower uterine segment
C54.1 Malignant neoplasm of endometrium
C54.2 Malignant neoplasm of myometrium
C54.3 Malignant neoplasm of fundus uteri
C54.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of corpus uteri
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C54.9 Malignant neoplasm corpus uteri NOS
C55 Malignant neoplasm of uterus, part unspecified
C56 Malignant neoplasm of ovary
C56.0o Malignant neoplasm of ovary, unilateral
C56.1o Malignant neoplasm of ovary, bilateral
C56.9o Malignant neoplasm of ovary, not specified whether unilateral or bilateral
C57
Malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified female genital organs
C57.0 Malignant neoplasm of fallopian tube
     Includes:
    Oviduct
   Uterine tube
C57.00o Malignant neoplasm of fallopian tube, unilateral
C57.01o Malignant neoplasm of fallopian tube, bilateral
C57.09o Malignant neoplasm of fallopian tube, unspecified whether unilateral or bilateral
C57.1 Malignant neoplasm of broad ligament
C57.2 Malignant neoplasm of round ligament
C57.3 Malignant neoplasm of parametrium
     Includes:
    Uterine ligament NOS
C57.4 Malignant neoplasm of uterine adnexa, unspecified
C57.7 Malignant neoplasm of other specified female genital organs
     Includes:
    Wolffian body or duct
C57.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of female genital organs
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Malignant neoplasm of female genital organs whose point of origin cannot be classified to any
 one of the categories (C51-C57.7) (C58)
Tubo-ovarian
Utero-ovarian
C57.9 Malignant neoplasm of female genital organ, unspecified
     Includes:
    Female genitourinary tract NOS
119
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C58
Malignant neoplasm of placenta
Includes:
C58
Excludes:
Choriocarcinoma NOS
Chorionepithelioma NOS
chorioadenoma (destruens) (D39.2)
hydatidiform mole:
•
NOS (O01.9)
•
invasive (D39.2)
•
malignant (D39.2)
Malignant neoplasms of male genital organs
(C60-C63)
Includes:
C60
skin of male genital organs
Malignant neoplasm of penis
C60.0 Malignant neoplasm of prepuce
     Includes:
    Foreskin
C60.1 Malignant neoplasm of glans penis
C60.2 Malignant neoplasm of body of penis
     Includes:
    Corpus cavernosum
C60.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of penis
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C60.9 Malignant neoplasm of penis unspecified
     Includes:
    Skin of penis NOS
C61 Malignant neoplasm of prostate
C62 Malignant neoplasm of testis
C62.0 Malignant neoplasm of undescended testis
     Includes:
    Ectopic testis [site of neoplasm]
   Retained testis [site of neoplasm]
C62.00o Malignant neoplasm of undescended right testis
C62.01o Malignant neoplasm of undescended left testis
C62.09o Malignant neoplasm of undescended testis, unspecified side
C62.1 Malignant neoplasm of descended testis
     Includes:
    Scrotal testis
C62.10o Malignant neoplasm of descended right testis
C62.11o Malignant neoplasm of descended left testis
C62.19o Malignant neoplasm of descended testis, unspecified side
C62.9 Malignant neoplasm of testis unspecified
C62.90o Malignant neoplasm of right testis, unspecified
C62.91o Malignant neoplasm of left testis, unspecified
C62.99o Malignant neoplasm of testis, unspecified, unspecified side
C63
Malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified male genital organs
C63.0 Malignant neoplasm of epididymis
C63.1 Malignant neoplasm of spermatic cord
C63.2 Malignant neoplasm of scrotum
     Includes:
    Skin of scrotum
120
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
C63.7
Malignant neoplasm of other specified male genital organs
Includes:
Seminal vesicle
Tunica vaginalis
C63.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of male genital organs
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Malignant neoplasm of male genital organs whose point of origin cannot be classified to any one
 of the categories C60-C63.7
C63.9 
C68.9
Malignant neoplasm of male genital organ, unspecified
Includes:
Male genitourinary tract NOS
Malignant neoplasms of urinary tract
(C64-C68)
C64
Malignant neoplasm of kidney, except renal pelvis
Excludes:
C65
Malignant neoplasm of renal pelvis
Includes:
C66
Pelviureteric junction
Renal calyces
Malignant neoplasm of ureter
Excludes:
C67
renal:
•
calyces (C65)
•
pelvis (C65)
ureteric orifice of bladder (C67.6)
Malignant neoplasm of bladder
C67.0 Malignant neoplasm of trigone of bladder
C67.1 Malignant neoplasm of dome of bladder
C67.2 Malignant neoplasm lateral wall bladder
C67.3 Malignant neoplasm anterior wall bladder
C67.4 Malignant neoplasm of posterior wall of bladder
C67.5 Malignant neoplasm of bladder neck
     Includes:
    Internal urethral orifice
C67.6 Malignant neoplasm of ureteric orifice
C67.7 Malignant neoplasm of urachus
C67.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of bladder
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C67.9 Malignant neoplasm of bladder, unspecified
C68
Malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified urinary organs
Excludes:
genitourinary tract NOS:
•
female (C57.9)
•
male (C63.9)
C68.0 Malignant neoplasm of urethra
     Excludes:
    urethral orifice of bladder (C67.5)
C68.1 Malignant neoplasm of paraurethral gland
C68.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of urinary organs
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Malignant neoplasm of urinary organs whose point of origin cannot be classified to any one of
 the categories C64-C68.1
C68.9 Malignant neoplasm urinary organ unspecified
     Includes:
    Urinary system NOS
121
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C69
Malignant neoplasms of eye, brain and other parts of central nervous
system
(C69-C72)
C69
Malignant neoplasm of eye and adnexa
Excludes:
connective tissue of eyelid (C49.0)
eyelid (skin) (C43.1,C44.1)
optic nerve (C72.3)
C69.0 Malignant neoplasm of conjunctiva
C69.1 Malignant neoplasm of cornea
C69.2 Malignant neoplasm of retina
C69.3 Malignant neoplasm of choroid
C69.4 Malignant neoplasm of ciliary body
     Includes:
    Eyeball
C69.5 Malignant neoplasm lacrimal gland & duct
     Includes:
    Lacrimal sac
   Nasolacrimal duct
C69.6 Malignant neoplasm of orbit
     Includes:
    Connective tissue of orbit
   Extraocular muscle
  Peripheral nerves of orbit
 Retro-ocular tissue
Retrobulbar tissue
Excludes:
orbital bone (C41.0)
C69.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of eye and adnexa
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C69.9 Malignant neoplasm of eye unspecified
C70
Malignant neoplasm of meninges
C70.0 Malignant neoplasm of cerebral meninges
C70.1 Malignant neoplasm of spinal meninges
C70.9 Malignant neoplasm of meninges, unspecified
C71
Malignant neoplasm of brain
Excludes:
cranial nerves (C72.2 - C72.5)
retrobulbar tissue (C69.6)
C71.0 Malignant neoplasm of cerebrum, except lobes and ventricles
C71.1 Malignant neoplasm of frontal lobe
C71.2 Malignant neoplasm of temporal lobe
C71.3 Malignant neoplasm of parietal lobe
C71.4 Malignant neoplasm of occipital lobe
C71.5 Malignant neoplasm of cerebral ventricle
     Excludes:
    fourth ventricle (C71.7)
C71.6 Malignant neoplasm of cerebellum
C71.7 Malignant neoplasm of brain stem
     Includes:
    Fourth ventricle
   Infratentorial NOS
122
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
C71.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of brain
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C71.9 Malignant neoplasm of brain unspecified
C72
C75.4
Malignant neoplasm of spinal cord, cranial nerves and other parts of central
nervous system
Excludes:
meninges (C70.-)
peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system (C47.-)
C72.0 Malignant neoplasm of spinal cord
C72.1 Malignant neoplasm of cauda equina
C72.2 Malignant neoplasm of olfactory nerve
     Includes:
    Olfactory bulb
C72.3 Malignant neoplasm of optic nerve
     Includes:
    Optic:
   •
    chiasm
   •
    tract
C72.4 Malignant neoplasm of acoustic nerve
C72.5 Malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified cranial nerves
     Includes:
    Cranial nerve NOS
C72.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of brain and other parts of central nervous system
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
   Includes:
  Malignant neoplasm of brain and other parts of central nervous system whose point of origin
 cannot be classified to any one of the categories C70-C72.5
C72.9 Malignant neoplasm of central nervous system, unspecified
     Includes:
    Nervous system NOS
Malignant neoplasms of thyroid and other endocrine glands
(C73-C75)
C73 Malignant neoplasm of thyroid gland
C74 Malignant neoplasm of adrenal gland
C74.0 Malignant neoplasm cortex adrenal gland
C74.1 Malignant neoplasm medulla adrenal gland
     Includes:
    Malignant phaeochromocytoma unspecified site
C74.9 Malignant neoplasm adrenal gland unspecified
C75
Malignant neoplasm of other endocrine glands and related structures
Excludes:
adrenal gland (C74.-)
endocrine pancreas (C25.4)
ovary (C56)
testis (C62.-)
thymus (C37)
thyroid gland (C73)
C75.0 Malignant neoplasm of parathyroid gland
C75.1 Malignant neoplasm of pituitary gland
C75.2 Malignant neoplasm craniopharyngeal duct
C75.3 Malignant neoplasm of pineal gland
C75.4 Malignant neoplasm of carotid body
123
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C75.5 
C75.5
Malignant neoplasm of aortic body and other paraganglia
C75.8 Malignant neoplasm of pluriglandular involvement, unspecified
     Note:
    If the sites of multiple involvement are known, they should be coded separately.
C75.9 Malignant neoplasm endocrine gland unspecified
Malignant neoplasms of ill-defined, secondary and unspecified sites
(C76-C80)
C76
Malignant neoplasm of other and ill-defined sites
Excludes:
malignant neoplasm of genitourinary tract NOS:
•
female (C57.9)
•
lymphoid, haematopoietic and related tissue (C81-C96)
•
male (C63.9)
•
unspecified site (C80.-)
C76.0 Malignant neoplasm head face & neck
     Includes:
    Cheek NOS
   Nose NOS
C76.1 Malignant neoplasm of thorax
     Includes:
    Axilla NOS
   Intrathoracic NOS
  Thoracic NOS
C76.2 Malignant neoplasm of abdomen
C76.3 Malignant neoplasm of pelvis
     Includes:
    Groin NOS
   Sites overlapping systems within the pelvis, such as:
  •
   rectovaginal (septum)
  •
   rectovesical (septum)
C76.4 Malignant neoplasm of upper limb
C76.5 Malignant neoplasm of lower limb
C76.7 Malignant neoplasm other ill-defined sites
C76.8 Overlapping malignant lesion of other and ill-defined sites
     Note:
    [See note 5 at beginning of Chapter II]
C77
Secondary and unspecified malignant neoplasm of lymph nodes
Excludes:
malignant neoplasm of lymph nodes, specified as primary (C81-C88, C96.-)
C77.0 Secondary malignant neoplasm lymph nodes of head, face and neck
     Includes:
    Supraclavicular lymph nodes
C77.1 Secondary malignant neoplasm of intrathoracic lymph nodes
C77.2 Secondary malignant neoplasm of intra-abdominal lymph nodes
C77.3 Secondary malignant neoplasm of axillary and upper limb lymph nodes
     Includes:
    Pectoral lymph nodes
C77.4 Secondary malignant neoplasm of inguinal and lower limb lymph nodes
C77.5 Secondary malignant neoplasm of intrapelvic lymph nodes
C77.8 Secondary malignant neoplasm of lymph nodes of multiple regions
C77.9 Secondary malignant neoplasm of lymph node, unspecified
124
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
C78
Secondary malignant neoplasm of respiratory and digestive organs
C78.0 C78.1 Secondary malignant neoplasm of mediastinum
C78.2 Secondary malignant neoplasm of pleura
     Includes:
    Malignant pleural effusion NOS
C78.3 Secondary malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified respiratory organs
C78.4 Secondary malignant neoplasm of small intestine
C78.5 Secondary malignant neoplasm of large intestine and rectum
C78.6 Secondary malignant neoplasm of retroperitoneum and peritoneum
     Includes:
    Malignant ascites NOS
C78.7 Secondary malignant neoplasm of liver and intrahepatic bile duct
C78.8 
C80.9
Secondary malignant neoplasm of lung
Secondary malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified digestive organs
C79
Secondary malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified sites
C79.0 Secondary malignant neoplasm of kidney and renal pelvis
C79.1 Secondary malignant neoplasm of bladder and other and unspecified urinary organs
C79.2 Secondary malignant neoplasm of skin
C79.3 Secondary malignant neoplasm of brain and cerebral meninges
C79.4 Secondary malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified parts of nervous system
C79.5 Secondary malignant neoplasm of bone and bone marrow
C79.6 Secondary malignant neoplasm of ovary
C79.7 Secondary malignant neoplasm of adrenal gland
C79.8 Secondary malignant neoplasm of other specified sites
C79.80o Secondary malignant neoplasm of breast
C79.88o Secondary malignant neoplasm of other specified sites
C79.9 Secondary malignant neoplasm, unspecified site
     Includes:
    Carcinomatosis (secondary)
   Generalized (secondary):
  •
   cancer NOS
  •
   malignancy NOS
  Multiple cancer (secondary) NOS
 Excludes:
disseminated malignant neoplasm, no primary indicated (C80.-)
C80
Malignant neoplasm without specification of site
C80.0 Malignant neoplasm, primary site unknown, so stated
     Includes:
    Primary site unknown
C80.9 Malignant neoplasm, unspecified
     Includes:
    Cancer NOS
   Carcinoma NOS
  Malignancy NOS
 Malignant cachexia NOS
125
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C81
Malignant neoplasms of lymphoid, haematopoietic and related tissue
(C81-C96)
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
C81
The terms used in categories C82-C85 for non-Hodgkin's lymphomas are those of the Working Formulation,
which attempted to find common ground among several major classification schemes. The terms used in these
schemes are not given in the Tabular List but appear in the Alphabetical Index; exact equivalence with the terms
appearing in the Tabular List is not always possible.
morphology codes 959-994 with behaviour code /3
secondary and unspecified neoplasm of lymph nodes (C77.-)
Hodgkin's disease
Includes:
morphology codes 965-966 with behaviour code /3
C81.0 Hodgkin's disease, lymphocytic predominance
     Includes:
    Lymphocytic-histiocytic predominance
   Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin's Disease
C81.1 Hodgkin's disease nodular sclerosis
C81.2 Hodgkin's disease mixed cellularity
C81.3 Hodgkin's disease lymphocytic depletion
C81.7 Other Hodgkin's disease
     Includes:
    Hodgkin's granuloma
C81.9 Hodgkin's disease, unspecified
C82
Follicular [nodular] non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
Includes:
follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with or without diffuse areas
morphology code 969 with behaviour code /3
C82.0 Small cleaved cell, follicular Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
C82.1 Mixed small cleaved and large cell, follicular Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
C82.2 Large cell, follicular Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
C82.7 Other types of follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
C82.9 Follicular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, unspecified
     Includes:
    Nodular non-Hodgkin's lymphoma NOS
C83
Diffuse non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
Includes:
morphology codes 9593, 9595, 967-968 with behaviour code /3
C83.0 Small cell (diffuse) Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
C83.1 Small cleaved cell (diffuse) Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
C83.2 Mixed small and large cell (diffuse) Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
C83.3 Large cell (diffuse) Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
     Includes:
    Reticulum cell sarcoma
C83.4 Immunoblastic (diffuse) Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
C83.5 Lymphoblastic (diffuse) Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
C83.6 Undifferentiated (diffuse) Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
C83.7 Burkitt's tumour
C83.8 Other types of diffuse non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
C83.9 Diffuse non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, unspecified
126
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
C84
Peripheral and cutaneous T-cell lymphomas
Includes:
morphology code 970 with behaviour code /3
C84.0 C84.1 Sézary's disease
C84.4 Peripheral T-cell lymphoma
     Includes:
    Lennert's lymphoma
C84.5 
C90.21o
Mycosis fungoides
Other and unspecified T-cell lymphomas
Note:
If T-cell lineage or involvement is mentioned in conjunction with a specific lymphoma, code to
the more specific description.
C85
Other and unspecified types of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
Includes:
morphology codes 9590-9592, 9594, 971 with behaviour code /3
C85.1 B-cell lymphoma, unspecified
     Note:
    If B-cell lineage or involvement is mentioned in conjunction with a specific lymphoma, code to
   the more specific description.
C85.7 Other specified types of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
C85.9 Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, unspecified type
     Includes:
    Lymphoma NOS
   Malignant lymphoma NOS
  Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma NOS
C88
Malignant immunoproliferative diseases
Includes:
morphology code 976 with behaviour code /3
C88.0 Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma
C88.00o Waldenström's macroglobulinaemia
C88.08o Other lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma
C88.1 Alpha heavy chain disease
C88.2 Gamma heavy chain disease
     Includes:
    Franklin's disease
C88.3 Immunoproliferative small intestinal disease
     Includes:
    Mediterranean disease
C88.7 Other malignant immunoproliferative diseases
C88.9 Malignant immunoproliferative disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Immunoproliferative disease NOS
C90
Multiple myeloma and malignant plasma cell neoplasms
Includes:
morphology codes 973, 9830 with behaviour code /3
C90.0 Multiple myeloma
     Includes:
    Kahler's disease
   Myelomatosis
  Excludes:
 Solitary myeloma (C90.2)
C90.1 Plasma cell leukaemia
C90.2 Plasmacytoma
     Includes:
    Malignant plasma cell tumour NOS
   Solitary myeloma
C90.20o Plasmacytoma of bone
       Includes:
      Plasmacytoma NOS
C90.21o Plasmacytoma of other tissue
       Includes:
      Extramedullary plasmacytoma
127
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
C91
Lymphoid leukaemia
Includes:
C91
morphology codes 982, 9940-9941 with behaviour code /3
C91.0 Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
     Excludes:
    acute exacerbation of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (C91.1)
C91.1 Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
C91.3 Prolymphocytic leukaemia
C91.4 Hairy-cell leukaemia
     Includes:
    Leukaemic reticuloendotheliosis
C91.5 Adult T-cell leukaemia
C91.7 Other lymphoid leukaemia
C91.9 Lymphoid leukaemia, unspecified
C92
Myeloid leukaemia
Includes:
leukaemia:
•
granulocytic
•
myelogenous
morphology codes 986-988, 9930 with behaviour code /3
C92.0 Acute myeloid leukaemia
     Excludes:
    acute exacerbation of chronic myeloid leukaemia (C92.1)
C92.1 Chronic myeloid leukaemia
C92.3 Myeloid sarcoma
     Includes:
    Chloroma
   Granulocytic sarcoma
C92.4 Acute promyelocytic leukaemia
C92.5 Acute myelomonocytic leukaemia
C92.7 Other myeloid leukaemia
C92.9 Myeloid leukaemia, unspecified
C93
Monocytic leukaemia
Includes:
monocytoid leukaemia
morphology code 989 with behaviour code /3
C93.0 Acute monocytic leukaemia
C93.7 Other monocytic leukaemia
C93.9 Monocytic leukaemia, unspecified
C94
Other leukaemias of specified cell type
Includes:
Excludes:
morphology codes 984, 9850, 9900, 9910, 9931-9932 with behaviour code /3
leukaemic reticuloendotheliosis (C91.4)
plasma cell leukaemia (C90.1)
C94.0 Acute erythraemia and erythroleukaemia
     Includes:
    Acute erythraemic myelosis
   Di Guglielmo's disease
C94.2 Acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia
     Includes:
    Leukaemia:
   •
    megakaryoblastic (acute)
   •
    megakaryocytic (acute)
C94.3 Mast cell leukaemia
C94.5 Acute myelofibrosis
C94.7 Other specified leukaemias
128
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
C95
Leukaemia of unspecified cell type
Includes:
morphology code 980 with behaviour code /3
C95.0 C95.1 Chronic leukaemia of unspecified cell type
C95.7 Other leukaemia of unspecified cell type
C95.9 
C97
Acute leukaemia of unspecified cell type
Includes:
Blast cell leukaemia
Stem cell leukaemia
Excludes:
acute exacerbation of unspecified chronic leukaemia (C95.1)
Leukaemia, unspecified
C96
Other and unspecified malignant neoplasms of lymphoid, haematopoietic
and related tissue
Includes:
morphology codes 972, 974 with behaviour code /3
C96.0 Letterer-Siwe disease
     Includes:
    Nonlipid:
   •
    reticuloendotheliosis
   •
    reticulosis
C96.1 Malignant histiocytosis
     Includes:
    Histiocytic medullary reticulosis
C96.2 Malignant mast cell tumour
     Includes:
    Malignant:
   •
    mastocytoma
   •
    mastocytosis
   Mast cell sarcoma
  Excludes:
 mast cell leukaemia (C94.3)
mastocytosis (cutaneous) (Q82.2)
C96.3 True histiocytic lymphoma
C96.7 Other specified malignant neoplasms of lymphoid, haematopoietic and related tissue
C96.9 Malignant neoplasm of lymphoid, haematopoietic and related tissue, unspecified
Malignant neoplasms of independent (primary) multiple sites
(C97)
C97
Malignant neoplasms of independent (primary) multiple sites
129
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D00
In situ neoplasms
(D00-D09)
Note:
Includes:
D00
Many in situ neoplasms are regarded as being located within a continuum of morphological change between
dysplasia and invasive cancer. For example, for cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) three grades are
recognized, the third of which (CIN III) includes both severe dysplasia and carcinoma in situ. This system of
grading has been extended to other organs, such as vulva and vagina. Descriptions of grade III intraepithelial
neoplasia, with or without mention of severe dysplasia, are assigned to this section; grades I and II are classified
as dysplasia of the organ system involved and should be coded to the relevant body system chapter.
Bowen's disease
erythroplasia
morphology codes with behaviour code /2
Queyrat's erythroplasia
Carcinoma in situ of oral cavity, oesophagus and stomach
Excludes:
melanoma in situ (D03.-)
D00.0 Carcinoma in situ of lip, oral cavity and pharynx
     Excludes:
    aryepiglottic fold, laryngeal aspect (D02.0)
   epiglottis:
  •
   NOS (D02.0)
  •
   suprahyoid portion (D02.0)
  skin of lip (D03.0, D04.0)
D00.00o Carcinoma in situ of labial mucosa and vermilion border
D00.01o Carcinoma in situ of buccal mucosa
D00.02o Carcinoma in situ of gingiva and edentulous alveolar ridge
D00.03o Carcinoma in situ of soft palate
D00.04o Carcinoma in situ of hard palate
D00.05o Carcinoma in situ of floor of mouth
D00.06o Carcinoma in situ of tongue
D00.07o Carcinoma in situ of pharynx
       Includes:
      Aryepiglottic fold:
     •
      NOS
     •
      hypopharyngeal aspect
     •
      marginal zone
D00.08o Carcinoma in situ of oral cavity, other specified site
       Includes:
      Salivary (major) (minor) (parotid) (sublingual) (submandibular) (submaxillary) gland
D00.09o Carcinoma in situ of oral cavity, unspecified site
D00.1 Carcinoma in situ of oesophagus
D00.2 Carcinoma in situ of stomach
D01
Carcinoma in situ of other and unspecified digestive organs
Excludes:
melanoma in situ (D03.-)
D01.0 Carcinoma in situ of colon
     Excludes:
    rectosigmoid junction (D01.1)
D01.1 Carcinoma in situ of rectosigmoid junction
D01.2 Carcinoma in situ of rectum
D01.3 Carcinoma in situ of anus and anal canal
     Excludes:
    anal:
   •
    margin (D03.5,D04.5)
   •
    skin (D03.5, D04.5)
   perianal skin (D03.5, D04.5)
130
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
D01.4 Carcinoma in situ of other and unspecified parts of intestine
     Excludes:
    ampulla of Vater (D01.5)
D01.5 Carcinoma in situ of liver, gallbladder and bile ducts
     Includes:
    Ampulla of Vater
D01.7 Carcinoma in situ of other specified digestive organs
     Includes:
    Pancreas
D01.9 Carcinoma in situ of digestive organ, unspecified
D02
D04
Carcinoma in situ of middle ear and respiratory system
Excludes:
melanoma in situ (D03.-)
D02.0 Carcinoma in situ of larynx
     Includes:
    Aryepiglottic fold, laryngeal aspect
   Epiglottis (suprahyoid portion)
  Excludes:
 aryepiglottic fold:
•
 NOS (D00.0)
•
 hypopharyngeal aspect (D00.0)
•
 marginal zone (D00.0)
D02.1 Carcinoma in situ of trachea
D02.2 Carcinoma in situ of bronchus and lung
D02.3 Carcinoma in situ of other parts of respiratory system
     Includes:
    Accessory sinuses
   Middle ear
  Nasal cavities
 Excludes:
ear (external)(skin) (D03.2, D04.2)
nose:
•
 NOS (D09.7)
•
 skin (D03.3, D04.2)
D02.4 Carcinoma in situ of respiratory system, unspecified
D03
Melanoma in situ
Includes:
morphology codes 872-879 with behaviour code /2
D03.0 Melanoma in situ of lip
D03.1 Melanoma in situ of eyelid, including canthus
D03.2 Melanoma in situ of ear and external auricular canal
D03.3 Melanoma in situ of other and unspecified parts of face
D03.4 Melanoma in situ of scalp and neck
D03.5 Melanoma in situ of trunk
     Includes:
    Anal:
   •
    margin
   •
    skin
   Breast (skin)(soft tissue)
  Perianal skin
D03.6 Melanoma in situ of upper limb, including shoulder
D03.7 Melanoma in situ of lower limb, including hip
D03.8 Melanoma in situ of other sites
D03.9 Melanoma in situ, unspecified
D04
Carcinoma in situ of skin
Excludes:
erythroplasia of Queyrat (penis) NOS (D07.4)
melanoma in situ (D03.-)
131
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D04.0 
D04.0
Carcinoma in situ of skin of lip
Excludes:
vermilion border of lip (D00.0)
D04.1 Carcinoma in situ of skin of eyelid, including canthus
D04.2 Carcinoma in situ of skin of ear and external auricular canal
D04.3 Carcinoma in situ of skin of other and unspecified parts of face
D04.4 Carcinoma in situ of skin of scalp and neck
D04.5 Carcinoma in situ of skin of trunk
     Includes:
    Anal:
   •
    margin
   •
    skin
   Perianal skin
  Skin of breast
 Excludes:
anus NOS (D01.3)
skin of genital organs (D07.-)
D04.6 Carcinoma in situ of skin of upper limb, including shoulder
D04.7 Carcinoma in situ of skin of lower limb, including hip
D04.8 Carcinoma in situ of skin of other sites
D04.9 Carcinoma in situ of skin, unspecified
D05
Carcinoma in situ of breast
Excludes:
carcinoma in situ of skin of breast (D04.5)
melanoma in situ of breast (skin) (D03.5)
D05.0 Lobular carcinoma in situ
D05.1 Intraductal carcinoma in situ
     Includes:
    Ductal carcinoma in situ
D05.7 Other carcinoma in situ of breast
D05.9 Carcinoma in situ of breast, unspecified
D06
Carcinoma in situ of cervix uteri
Includes:
Excludes:
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia [CIN], grade III, with or without mention of severe dysplasia
melanoma in situ of cervix (D03.5)
severe dysplasia of cervix NOS (N87.2)
D06.0 Carcinoma in situ of endocervix
D06.1 Carcinoma in situ of exocervix
D06.7 Carcinoma in situ of other parts of cervix
D06.9 Carcinoma in situ of cervix, unspecified
D07
Carcinoma in situ of other and unspecified genital organs
Excludes:
melanoma in situ (D03.5)
D07.0 Carcinoma in situ of endometrium
D07.1 Carcinoma in situ of vulva
     Includes:
    Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia [VIN], grade III, with or without mention of severe dysplasia
   Excludes:
  severe dysplasia of vulva NOS (N90.2)
D07.2 Carcinoma in situ of vagina
     Includes:
    Vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia [VAIN], grade III, with or without mention of severe dysplasia
   Excludes:
  severe dysplasia of vagina NOS (N89.2)
D07.3 Carcinoma in situ of other and unspecified female genital organs
D07.4 Carcinoma in situ of penis
     Includes:
    Erythroplasia of Queyrat NOS
132
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
D07.5 Carcinoma in situ of prostate
     Excludes:
    low grade dysplasia of prostate (N42.3)
D07.6 Carcinoma in situ of other and unspecified male genital organs
D09
D10.5
Carcinoma in situ of other and unspecified sites
Excludes:
melanoma in situ (D03.-)
D09.0 Carcinoma in situ of bladder
D09.1 Carcinoma in situ of other and unspecified urinary organs
D09.2 Carcinoma in situ of eye
     Excludes:
    skin of eyelid (D04.1)
D09.3 Carcinoma in situ of thyroid and other endocrine glands
     Excludes:
    endocrine pancreas (D01.7)
   ovary (D07.3)
  testis (D07.6)
D09.7 Carcinoma in situ of other specified sites
D09.9 Carcinoma in situ, unspecified
Benign neoplasms
(D10-D36)
Includes:
D10
morphology codes with behaviour code /0
Benign neoplasm of mouth and pharynx
D10.0 Benign neoplasm of lip
     Includes:
    Lip (frenulum)(inner aspect)(mucosa)(vermilion border)
   Excludes:
  skin of lip (D22.0, D23.0)
D10.1 Benign neoplasm of tongue
     Includes:
    Lingual tonsil
D10.2 Benign neoplasm of floor of mouth
D10.3 Benign neoplasm of other and unspecified parts of mouth
     Includes:
    Minor salivary gland NOS
   Excludes:
  benign odontogenic neoplasms (D16.4-D16.5)
 mucosa of lip (D10.0)
nasopharyngeal surface of soft palate (D10.6)
D10.4 Benign neoplasm of tonsil
     Includes:
    Tonsil (faucial)(palatine)
   Excludes:
  lingual tonsil (D10.1)
 pharyngeal tonsil (D10.6)
tonsillar:
•
 fossa (D10.5)
•
 pillars (D10.5)
D10.5 Benign neoplasm of other parts of oropharynx
     Includes:
    Epiglottis, anterior aspect
   Tonsillar:
  •
   fossa
  •
   pillars
  Vallecula
 Excludes:
epiglottis:
•
 NOS (D14.1)
•
 suprahyoid portion (D14.1)
133
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D10.6 Benign neoplasm of nasopharynx
     Includes:
    Pharyngeal tonsil
   Posterior margin of septum and choanae
D10.7 Benign neoplasm of hypopharynx
D10.9 Benign neoplasm of pharynx, unspecified
D10.6
D11
Benign neoplasm of major salivary glands
Excludes:
benign neoplasms of:
•
minor salivary glands NOS (D10.3)
•
specified minor salivary glands which are classified according to their anatomical location
D11.0 Benign neoplasm parotid gland
D11.7 Benign neoplasm of other major salivary glands
     Includes:
    Gland:
   •
    sublingual
   •
    submandibular
D11.9 Benign neoplasm of major salivary gland, unspecified
D12
Benign neoplasm of colon, rectum, anus and anal canal
D12.0 Benign neoplasm of caecum
     Includes:
    Ileocaecal valve
D12.1 Benign neoplasm of appendix
D12.2 Benign neoplasm of ascending colon
D12.3 Benign neoplasm of transverse colon
     Includes:
    Hepatic flexure
   Splenic flexure
D12.4 Benign neoplasm of descending colon
D12.5 Benign neoplasm of sigmoid colon
D12.6 Benign neoplasm of colon, unspecified
     Includes:
    Adenomatosis of colon
   Benign neoplasm of large intestine NOS
  Polyposis (hereditary) of colon
D12.7 Benign neoplasm of rectosigmoid junction
D12.8 Benign neoplasm of rectum
D12.9 Benign neoplasm of anus and anal canal
     Excludes:
    anal:
   •
    margin (D22.5, D23.5)
   •
    skin (D22.5, D23.5)
   perianal skin (D22.5, D23.5)
D13
Benign neoplasm of other and ill-defined parts of digestive system
D13.0 Benign neoplasm of oesophagus
D13.1 Benign neoplasm of stomach
D13.2 Benign neoplasm of duodenum
D13.3 Benign neoplasm of other and unspecified parts of small intestine
D13.4 Benign neoplasm of liver
     Includes:
    Intrahepatic bile ducts
   regenerative nodular hyperplasia of the liver
D13.5 Benign neoplasm of extrahepatic bile ducts
134
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
D13.6 Benign neoplasm of pancreas
     Excludes:
    endocrine pancreas (D13.7)
D13.7 Benign neoplasm of endocrine pancreas
     Includes:
    Islet cell tumour
   Islets of Langerhans
D13.9 Benign neoplasm of ill-defined sites within the digestive system
     Includes:
    Digestive system NOS
   Intestine NOS
  Spleen
D14
D16.0
Benign neoplasm of middle ear and respiratory system
D14.0 Benign neoplasm of middle ear, nasal cavity and accessory sinuses
     Includes:
    Cartilage of nose
   Excludes:
  auricular canal (external) (D22.2, D23.2)
 bone of:
•
 ear (D16.4)
•
 nose (D16.4)
cartilage of ear (D21.0)
ear (external)(skin) (D22.2, D23.2)
nose:
•
 NOS (D36.7)
•
 skin (D22.3, D23.3)
olfactory bulb (D33.3)
polyp (of):
•
 accessory sinus (J33.8)
•
 ear (middle) (H74.4)
•
 nasal (cavity) (J33.-)
posterior margin of septum and choanae (D10.6)
D14.1 Benign neoplasm of larynx
     Includes:
    Epiglottis (suprahyoid portion)
   Excludes:
  epiglottis, anterior aspect (D10.5)
 polyp of vocal cord and larynx (J38.1)
D14.2 Benign neoplasm of trachea
D14.3 Benign neoplasm of bronchus and lung
     Includes:
    hamartoma of lung
D14.4 Benign neoplasm of respiratory system, unspecified
D15
Benign neoplasm of other and unspecified intrathoracic organs
Excludes:
mesothelial tissue (D19.-)
D15.0 Benign neoplasm of thymus
D15.1 Benign neoplasm of heart
     Excludes:
    great vessels (D21.3)
D15.2 Benign neoplasm of mediastinum
D15.7 Benign neoplasms of other specified intrathoracic organs
D15.9 Benign neoplasm of intrathoracic organ, unspecified
D16
Benign neoplasm of bone and articular cartilage
Excludes:
D16.0
connective tissue of:
•
ear (D21.0)
•
eyelid (D21.0)
•
larynx (D14.1)
•
nose (D14.0)
synovia (D21.-)
Benign neoplasm of scapula and long bones of upper limb
135
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D16.1 
D16.1
Benign neoplasm of short bones of upper limb
D16.2 Benign neoplasm of long bones of lower limb
D16.3 Benign neoplasm of short bones of lower limb
D16.4 Benign neoplasm of bones of skull and face
     Includes:
    Maxilla (superior)
   Orbital bone
  Excludes:
 lower jaw bone (D16.5)
D16.5 Benign neoplasm of lower jaw bone
D16.6 Benign neoplasm of vertebral column
     Excludes:
    sacrum and coccyx (D16.8)
D16.7 Benign neoplasm of ribs, sternum and clavicle
D16.8 Benign neoplasm of pelvic bones, sacrum and coccyx
D16.9 Benign neoplasm of bone and articular cartilage, unspecified
D17
Benign lipomatous neoplasm
Includes:
morphology codes 885-888 with behaviour code /0
D17.0 Benign lipomatous neoplasm of skin and subcutaneous tissue of head, face and neck
     Includes:
    scalp
D17.1 Benign lipomatous neoplasm of skin and subcutaneous tissue of trunk
D17.2 Benign lipomatous neoplasm of skin and subcutaneous tissue of limbs
D17.3 Benign lipomatous neoplasm of skin and subcutaneous tissue of other and unspecified sites
D17.4 Benign lipomatous neoplasm of intrathoracic organs
D17.5 Benign lipomatous neoplasm of intra-abdominal organs
     Excludes:
    peritoneum and retroperitoneum (D17.7)
D17.6 Benign lipomatous neoplasm of spermatic cord
D17.7 Benign lipomatous neoplasm of other sites
     Includes:
    Peritoneum
   Retroperitoneum
D17.9 Benign lipomatous neoplasm, unspecified
     Includes:
    Lipoma NOS
D18
Haemangioma and lymphangioma, any site
Includes:
Excludes:
morphology codes 912-917 with behaviour code /0
blue or pigmented naevus (D22.-)
D18.0 Haemangioma, any site
     Includes:
    Angioma NOS
D18.00o Haemangioma of subcutaneous tissue
D18.01o Haemangioma of intracranial structures
D18.02o Haemangioma of hepatobiliary system
D18.03o Haemangioma of digestive system
D18.04o Haemangioma of ear, nose, mouth and throat
D18.08o Haemangioma of other sites
D18.09o Haemangioma, unspecified site
D18.1 Lymphangioma, any site
136
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
D19
Benign neoplasm of mesothelial tissue
Includes:
morphology code 905 with behaviour code /0
D19.0 D19.1 Benign neoplasm of mesothelial tissue of peritoneum
D19.7 Benign neoplasm of mesothelial tissue of other sites
D19.9 
D21.3
Benign neoplasm of mesothelial tissue of pleura
Benign neoplasm of mesothelial tissue, unspecified
Includes:
Benign mesothelioma NOS
D20
Benign neoplasm of soft tissue of retroperitoneum and peritoneum
Excludes:
benign lipomatous neoplasm of peritoneum and retroperitoneum (D17.7)
mesothelial tissue (D19.-)
D20.0 Benign neoplasm of retroperitoneum
     Includes:
    pseudomyeloma peritonei, benign
D20.1 Benign neoplasm of peritoneum
D21
Other benign neoplasms of connective and other soft tissue
Includes:
Excludes:
blood vessel
bursa
cartilage
fascia
fat
ligament, except uterine
lymphatic channel
muscle
synovia
tendon (sheath)
cartilage:
•
articular (D16.-)
•
larynx (D14.1)
•
nose (D14.0)
connective tissue of breast (D24)
haemangioma (D18.0)
lipomatous neoplasm (D17.-)
lymphangioma (D18.1)
peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system (D36.1)
peritoneum (D20.1)
retroperitoneum (D20.0)
uterine:
•
leiomyoma (D25.-)
•
ligament, any (D28.2)
vascular tissue (D18.-)
D21.0 Other benign neoplasm of connective and other soft tissue of head, face and neck
     Includes:
    Connective tissue of:
   •
    ear
   •
    eyelid
   Excludes:
  connective tissue of orbit (D31.6)
D21.1 Other benign neoplasm of connective and other soft tissue of upper limb, including shoulder
D21.2 Other benign neoplasm of connective and other soft tissue of lower limb, including hip
D21.3 Other benign connective and other soft tissue of thorax
     Includes:
    Axilla
   Diaphragm
  Great vessels
 Excludes:
heart (D15.1)
mediastinum (D15.2)
thymus (D15.0)
137
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D21.4 
D21.4
Other benign neoplasm of connective and other soft tissue of abdomen
D21.5 Other benign neoplasm of connective and other soft tissue of pelvis
     Excludes:
    uterine:
   •
    leiomyoma (D25.-)
   •
    ligament, any (D28.2)
D21.6 Other benign neoplasm of connective and other soft tissue of trunk, unspecified
     Includes:
    Back NOS
D21.9 Other benign neoplasm of connective and other soft tissue, unspecified
D22
Melanocytic naevi
Includes:
morphology codes 872-879 with behaviour code /0
naevus:
•
NOS
•
blue
•
hairy
•
pigmented
D22.0 Melanocytic naevi of lip
D22.1 Melanocytic naevi of eyelid, including canthus
D22.2 Melanocytic naevi of ear and external auricular canal
D22.3 Melanocytic naevi of other and unspecified parts of face
D22.4 Melanocytic naevi of scalp and neck
D22.5 Melanocytic naevi of trunk
     Includes:
    Anal:
   •
    margin
   •
    skin
   Perianal skin
  Skin of breast
D22.6 Melanocytic naevi of upper limb, including shoulder
D22.7 Melanocytic naevi of lower limb, including hip
D22.9 Melanocytic naevi, unspecified
D23
Other benign neoplasms of skin
Includes:
Excludes:
benign neoplasm of:
•
hair follicles
•
sebaceous glands
•
sweat glands
benign lipomatous neoplasms (D17.0 - D17.3)
melanocytic naevi (D22.-)
D23.0 Other benign neoplasm of skin of lip
     Excludes:
    vermilion border of lip (D10.0)
D23.1 Other benign neoplasm of skin of eyelid, including canthus
D23.2 Other benign neoplasm of skin of ear and external auricular canal
D23.3 Other benign neoplasm of skin of other and unspecified parts of face
D23.4 Other benign neoplasm of skin of scalp and neck
D23.5 Other benign neoplasm of skin of trunk
     Includes:
    Anal:
   •
    margin
   •
    skin
   Perianal skin
  Skin of breast
 Excludes:
anus NOS (D12.9)
skin of genital organs (D28-D29)
138
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
D23.6 Other benign neoplasm of skin of upper limb, including shoulder
D23.7 Other benign neoplasm of skin of lower limb, including hip
D23.9 Other benign neoplasm of skin, unspecified
D24
Benign neoplasm of breast
Includes:
Excludes:
D25
D29.4
Breast:
•
connective tissue
•
soft parts
benign mammary dysplasia (N60.-)
skin of breast (D22.5, D23.5)
Leiomyoma of uterus
Includes:
benign neoplasms of uterus with morphology code 889 and behaviour code /0
fibromyoma of uterus
D25.0 Submucous leiomyoma of uterus
D25.1 Intramural leiomyoma of uterus
D25.2 Subserosal leiomyoma of uterus
D25.9 Leiomyoma of uterus, unspecified
D26
Other benign neoplasms of uterus
D26.0 Other benign neoplasm of cervix uteri
D26.1 Other benign neoplasm of corpus uteri
D26.7 Other benign neoplasm of other parts of uterus
D26.9 Other benign neoplasm of uterus, unspecified
D27 Benign neoplasm of ovary
D28 Benign neoplasm of other and unspecified female genital organs
Includes:
adenomatous polyp
skin of female genital organs
D28.0 Benign neoplasm of vulva
D28.1 Benign neoplasm of vagina
D28.2 Benign neoplasm of uterine tubes and ligaments
     Includes:
    Fallopian tube
   Uterine ligament (broad)(round)
D28.7 Benign neoplasm of other specified female genital organs
D28.9 Benign neoplasm of female genital organ, unspecified
D29
Benign neoplasm of male genital organs
Includes:
skin of male genital organs
D29.0 Benign neoplasm of penis
D29.1 Benign neoplasm of prostate
     Excludes:
    hyperplasia of prostate (adenomatous) (N40)
   prostatic:
  •
   enlargement (N40)
  •
   hypertrophy (N40)
D29.2 Benign neoplasm of testis
D29.3 Benign neoplasm of epididymis
D29.4 Benign neoplasm of scrotum
     Includes:
    Skin of scrotum
139
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D29.7 Benign neoplasm of other male genital organs
     Includes:
    Seminal vesicle
   Spermatic cord
  Tunica vaginalis
D29.9 Benign neoplasm of male genital organ, unspecified
D29.7
D30
Benign neoplasm of urinary organs
D30.0 Benign neoplasm of kidney
     Excludes:
    renal:
   •
    calyces (D30.1)
   •
    pelvis (D30.1)
D30.1 Benign neoplasm of renal pelvis
D30.2 Benign neoplasm of ureter
     Excludes:
    ureteric orifice of bladder (D30.3)
D30.3 Benign neoplasm of bladder
     Includes:
    Orifice of bladder:
   •
    ureteric
   •
    urethral
D30.4 Benign neoplasm of urethra
     Excludes:
    urethral orifice of bladder (D30.3)
D30.7 Benign neoplasm of other urinary organs
     Includes:
    Paraurethral glands
D30.9 Benign neoplasm of urinary organ, unspecified
     Includes:
    Urinary system NOS
D31
Benign neoplasm of eye and adnexa
Excludes:
connective tissue of eyelid (D21.0)
optic nerve (D33.3)
skin of eyelid (D22.1, D23.1)
D31.0 Benign neoplasm of conjunctiva
D31.1 Benign neoplasm of cornea
D31.2 Benign neoplasm of retina
D31.3 Benign neoplasm of choroid
D31.4 Benign neoplasm of ciliary body
     Includes:
    Eyeball
D31.5 Benign neoplasm of lacrimal gland and duct
     Includes:
    Lacrimal sac
   Nasolacrimal duct
D31.6 Benign neoplasm of orbit, unspecified
     Includes:
    Connective tissue of orbit
   Extraocular muscle
  Peripheral nerves of orbit
 Retro-ocular tissue
Retrobulbar tissue
Excludes:
orbital bone (D16.4)
D31.9 Benign neoplasm of eye, unspecified
D32 Benign neoplasm of meninges
D32.0 Benign neoplasm of cerebral meninges
D32.1 Benign neoplasm of spinal meninges
140
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
D32.9
D33
Benign neoplasm of meninges, unspecified
Includes:
Meningioma NOS
D35.9
Benign neoplasm of brain and other parts of central nervous system
Excludes:
angioma (D18.0)
meninges (D32.-)
peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system (D36.1)
retro-ocular tissue (D31.6)
D33.0 Benign neoplasm of brain, supratentorial
     Includes:
    Cerebral ventricle
   Cerebrum
  Frontal lobe
 Occipital lobe
Parietal lobe
Temporal lobe
Excludes:
fourth ventricle (D33.1)
D33.1 Benign neoplasm of brain, infratentorial
     Includes:
    Brain stem
   Cerebellum
  Fourth ventricle
D33.2 Benign neoplasm of brain, unspecified
D33.3 Benign neoplasm of cranial nerves
     Includes:
    Olfactory bulb
D33.4 Benign neoplasm of spinal cord
D33.7 Benign neoplasm of other specified parts of central nervous system
D33.9 Benign neoplasm of central nervous system, unspecified
     Includes:
    Nervous system (central) NOS
D34 Benign neoplasm of thyroid gland
D35 Benign neoplasm of other and unspecified endocrine glands
Excludes:
endocrine pancreas (D13.7)
ovary (D27)
testis (D29.2)
thymus (D15.0)
D35.0 Benign neoplasm of adrenal gland
D35.1 Benign neoplasm of parathyroid gland
D35.2 Benign neoplasm of pituitary gland
D35.3 Benign neoplasm of craniopharyngeal duct
D35.4 Benign neoplasm of pineal gland
D35.5 Benign neoplasm of carotid body
D35.6 Benign neoplasm of aortic body and other paraganglia
D35.7 Benign neoplasm of other specified endocrine glands
D35.8 Benign neoplasm of pluriglandular involvement
D35.9 Benign neoplasm of endocrine gland, unspecified
141
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D36
D36
Benign neoplasm of other and unspecified sites
D36.0 Benign neoplasm of lymph nodes
D36.1 Benign neoplasm of peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system
     Excludes:
    peripheral nerves of orbit (D31.6)
D36.10o Benign neoplasm of peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system of face, head and neck
D36.11o Benign neoplasm of peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system, upper limb, including
       shoulder
D36.12o Benign neoplasm of peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system of lower limb,
       including hip
D36.13o Benign neoplasm of peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system of thorax
D36.14o Benign neoplasm of peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system of abdomen
D36.15o Benign neoplasm of peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system of pelvis
D36.16o Benign neoplasm of peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system of trunk, unspecified
D36.19o Benign neoplasm of peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system, unspecified
D36.7 Benign neoplasm of other specified sites
     Includes:
    Nose NOS
D36.9 Benign neoplasm of unspecified site
142
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
Neoplasms of uncertain or unknown behaviour
(D37-D48)
Note:
D37
D37.9
Categories D37-D48 classify by site neoplasms of uncertain or unknown behaviour, i.e., there is doubt whether
the neoplasm is malignant or benign. Such neoplasms are assigned behaviour code /1 in the classification of the
morphology of neoplasms.
Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of oral cavity and digestive
organs
D37.0 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of oral cavity and pharynx
     Excludes:
    aryepiglottic fold, laryngeal aspect (D38.0)
   epiglottis:
  •
   NOS (D38.0)
  •
   suprahyoid portion (D38.0)
  skin of lip (D48.5)
D37.01o Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of lip
       Includes:
      Vermilion border of lip
D37.02o Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of tongue
D37.03 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of the major salivary glands
D37.030o Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of parotid salivary glands
D37.031o Neoplasms of uncertain or unknown behaviour of sublingual salivary glands
D37.032o Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of submandibular salivary glands
D37.039o Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of the major salivary glands, unspecified
D37.04o Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of minor salivary glands
D37.05o Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of the pharynx
       Includes:
      Aryepiglottic fold:
     •
      NOS
     •
      hypopharyngeal aspect
     •
      marginal zone
D37.08o Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of other specified sites of the oral cavity
D37.1 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of stomach
D37.2 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of small intestine
D37.3 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of appendix
D37.4 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of the colon
D37.5 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of the rectum
     Includes:
    Rectosigmoid junction
D37.6 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of liver, gallbladder and bile ducts
     Includes:
    Ampulla of Vater
D37.7 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of other digestive organs
     Includes:
    Anal:
   •
    canal
   •
    sphincter
   Anus NOS
  Intestine NOS
 Oesophagus
Pancreas
Excludes:
anal:
•
 margin (D48.5)
•
 skin (D48.5)
perianal skin (D48.5)
D37.9 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of digestive organ, unspecified
143
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D38
D38
Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of middle ear and respiratory
and intrathoracic organs
Excludes:
heart (D48.7)
D38.0 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of larynx
     Includes:
    Aryepiglottic fold, laryngeal aspect
   Epiglottis (suprahyoid portion)
  Excludes:
 aryepiglottic fold:
•
 NOS (D37.0)
•
 hypopharyngeal aspect (D37.0)
•
 marginal zone (D37.0)
D38.1 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of trachea, bronchus and lung
D38.2 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of pleura
D38.3 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of mediastinum
D38.4 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of thymus
D38.5 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of other respiratory organs
     Includes:
    Accessory sinuses
   Cartilage of nose
  Middle ear
 Nasal cavities
Excludes:
ear (external)(skin) (D48.5)
nose:
•
 NOS (D48.7)
•
 skin (D48.5)
D38.6 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of respiratory organ, unspecified
D39
Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of female genital organs
D39.0 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of uterus
D39.1 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of ovary
D39.2 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of placenta
     Includes:
    Chorioadenoma destruens
   Hydatidiform mole:
  •
   invasive
  •
   malignant
  Excludes:
 hydatidiform mole NOS (O01.9)
D39.7 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of other female genital organs
     Includes:
    Skin of female genital organs
D39.9 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of female genital organ, unspecified
D40
Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of male genital organs
D40.0 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of prostate
D40.1 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of testis
D40.7 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of other male genital organs
     Includes:
    Skin of male genital organs
D40.9 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of male genital organ, unspecified
D41
Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of urinary organs
D41.0 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of kidney
     Excludes:
    renal pelvis (D41.1)
D41.1 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of renal pelvis
D41.2 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of ureter
144
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
D41.3 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of urethra
D41.4 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of bladder
D41.7 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of other urinary organs
D41.9 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of urinary organ, unspecified
D42
D44.9
Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of meninges
D42.0 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of cerebral meninges
D42.1 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of spinal meninges
D42.9 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of meninges, unspecified
D43
Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of brain and central nervous
system
Excludes:
peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous system (D48.2)
D43.0 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of brain, supratentorial
     Includes:
    Cerebral ventricle
   Cerebrum
  Frontal lobe
 Occipital lobe
Parietal lobe
Temporal lobe
Excludes:
fourth ventricle (D43.1)
D43.1 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of brain, infratentorial
     Includes:
    Brain stem
   Cerebellum
  Fourth ventricle
D43.2 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of brain, unspecified
D43.3 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of cranial nerves
D43.4 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of spinal cord
D43.7 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of other parts of central nervous system
D43.9 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of central nervous system, unspecified
     Includes:
    Nervous system (central) NOS
D44
Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of endocrine glands
Excludes:
endocrine pancreas (D37.7)
ovary (D39.1)
testis (D40.1)
thymus (D38.4)
D44.0 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of thyroid gland
D44.1 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of adrenal gland
D44.2 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of parathyroid gland
D44.3 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of pituitary gland
D44.4 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of craniopharyngeal duct
D44.5 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of pineal gland
D44.6 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of carotid body
D44.7 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of aortic body and other paraganglia
D44.8 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of pluriglandular involvement
     Includes:
    Multiple endocrine adenomatosis
D44.9 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of endocrine gland, unspecified
145
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D45
Polycythaemia vera
Includes:
D45
D46
Chronic erythraemia
Heilmeyer-Schöner disease
Morphology code M9950 with behaviour code /1
Myelodysplastic syndromes
Includes:
morphology code 998 with behaviour code /1
D46.0 Refractory anaemia without sideroblasts, so stated
D46.1 Refractory anaemia with sideroblasts
D46.2 Refractory anaemia with excess of blasts
D46.3 Refractory anaemia with excess of blasts with transformation
D46.4 Refractory anaemia, unspecified
D46.7 Other myelodysplastic syndromes
D46.9 Myelodysplastic syndrome, unspecified
     Includes:
    Myelodysplasia NOS
   Preleukaemia (syndrome) NOS
D47
Other neoplasms of uncertain or unknown behaviour of lymphoid,
haematopoietic and related tissue
Includes:
morphology codes 974, 976, 996-997 with behaviour code /1
D47.0 Histiocytic and mast cell tumours of uncertain and unknown behaviour
     Includes:
    Mast cell tumour NOS
   Mastocytoma NOS
  Excludes:
 mastocytosis (cutaneous) (Q82.2)
D47.1 Chronic myeloproliferative disease
     Includes:
    Myelofibrosis (with myeloid metaplasia)
   Myeloproliferative disease, unspecified
  Myelosclerosis (megakaryocytic) with myeloid metaplasia
D47.2 Monoclonal gammopathy
D47.3 Essential (haemorrhagic) thrombocythaemia
     Includes:
    Essential thrombocytosis
   Idiopathic haemorrhagic thrombocythaemia
D47.7 Other specified neoplasms of uncertain or unknown behaviour of lymphoid, haematopoietic
     and related tissue
D47.9 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of lymphoid, haematopoietic and related tissue,
     unspecified
    Includes:
   Lymphoproliferative disease NOS
146
NEOPLASMS (C00-D48)
D48
Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of other and unspecified sites
Excludes:
neurofibromatosis (nonmalignant) (Q85.0)
D48.0 D48.1 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of connective and other soft tissue
           Includes:
          Connective tissue of:
         •
          ear
         •
          eyelid
         Excludes:
        cartilage (of):
       •
        articular (D48.0)
       •
        larynx (D38.0)
       •
        nose (D38.5)
       connective tissue of breast (D48.6)
D48.2 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of peripheral nerves and autonomic nervous
     system
    Excludes:
   peripheral nerves of orbit (D48.7)
D48.3 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of retroperitoneum
D48.4 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of peritoneum
D48.5 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of skin
     Includes:
    Anal:
   •
    margin
   •
    skin
   Perianal skin
  Skin of breast
 Excludes:
anus NOS (D37.7)
skin of genital organs (D39.7, D40.7)
vermilion border of lip (D37.0)
D48.6 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of breast
     Includes:
    Connective tissue of breast
   Cystosarcoma phyllodes
  Excludes:
 skin of breast (D48.5)
D48.7 Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of other specified sites
     Includes:
    Eye
   Heart
  Peripheral nerves of orbit
 Excludes:
connective tissue (D48.1)
skin of eyelid (D48.5)
D48.9 
D48.9
Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour of bone and articular cartilage
Excludes:
cartilage of:
•
 ear (D48.1)
•
 larynx (D38.0)
•
 nose (D38.5)
connective tissue of eyelid (D48.1)
synovia (D48.1)
Neoplasm of uncertain or unknown behaviour, unspecified
Includes:
"Growth" NOS
Neoplasm NOS
New growth NOS
Tumour NOS
147
I
CHAPTER III
Diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and
certain disorders involving the immune mechanism
(D50-D89)
Excludes:
autoimmune disease (systemic) NOS (M35.9)
certain conditions originating in the perinatal period (P00-P96)
complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O00-O99)
congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (Q00-Q99)
endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (E00-E90)
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease (B24)
injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98)
neoplasms (C00-D48)
symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified (R00-R99)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
D50-D53
Nutritional anaemias
D55-D59
Haemolytic anaemias
D60-D64
Aplastic and other anaemias
D65-D69
Coagulation defects, purpura and other haemorrhagic conditions
D70-D77
Other diseases of blood and blood-forming organs
D80-D89
Certain disorders involving the immune mechanism
Asterisk categories for this chapter are provided as follows:
D63*
Anaemia in chronic diseases classified elsewhere
D77*
Other disorders of blood and blood-forming organs in diseases classified elsewhere
149
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D50
Nutritional anaemias
(D50-D53)
D50
Iron deficiency anaemia
Includes:
anaemia:
•
asiderotic
•
hypochromic
D50.0 Iron deficiency anaemia secondary to blood loss (chronic)
     Includes:
    Posthaemorrhagic anaemia (chronic)
   Excludes:
  acute posthaemorrhagic anaemia (D62)
 congenital anaemia from fetal blood loss (P61.3)
D50.1 Sideropenic dysphagia
     Includes:
    Kelly-Paterson syndrome
   Plummer-Vinson syndrome
D50.8 Other iron deficiency anaemias
     Includes:
    Nutritional iron deficiency anaemia
D50.9 Iron deficiency anaemia, unspecified
D51
Vitamin B12 deficiency anaemia
Excludes:
vitamin B 12 deficiency (E53.8)
D51.0 Vitamin B12 deficiency anaemia due to intrinsic factor deficiency
     Includes:
    Anaemia:
   •
    Addison
   •
    Biermer
   •
    pernicious (congenital)
   Congenital intrinsic factor deficiency
D51.1 Vitamin B12 deficiency anaemia due to selective vitamin B12 malabsorption with proteinuria
     Includes:
    Imerslund(-Gräsbeck) syndrome
    Megaloblastic hereditary anaemia
D51.2 Transcobalamin II deficiency
D51.3 Other dietary vitamin B12 deficiency anaemia
     Includes:
    Vegan anaemia
D51.8 Other vitamin B12 deficiency anaemias
D51.9 Vitamin B12 deficiency anaemia, unspecified
D52
Folate deficiency anaemia
D52.0 Dietary folate deficiency anaemia
     Includes:
    Nutritional megaloblastic anaemia
D52.1 Drug-induced folate deficiency anaemia
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
D52.8 Other folate deficiency anaemias
D52.9 Folate deficiency anaemia, unspecified
     Includes:
    Folic acid deficiency anaemia NOS
D53
Other nutritional anaemias
Includes:
D53.0
150
megaloblastic anaemia unresponsive to vitamin B 12 or folate therapy
Protein deficiency anaemia
Includes:
Amino-acid deficiency anaemia
Orotaciduric anaemia
Excludes:
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (E79.1)
DISEASES OF THE BLOOD AND BLOOD-FORMING ORGANS AND CERTAIN DISORDERS INVOLVING THE IM-
D53.1
Other megaloblastic anaemias, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Megaloblastic anaemia NOS
Excludes:
Di Guglielmo's disease (C94.0)
D53.2 Scorbutic anaemia
     Excludes:
    scurvy (E54)
D53.8 Other specified nutritional anaemias
     Includes:
    Anaemia associated with deficiency of:
   •
    copper
   •
    molybdenum
   •
    zinc
   Excludes:
  nutritional deficiencies without mention of anaemia, such as:
 •
  copper deficiency (E61.0)
 •
  molybdenum deficiency (E61.5)
 •
  zinc deficiency (E60)
D53.9 
D53.9
Nutritional anaemia, unspecified
Includes:
Simple chronic anaemia
Excludes:
anaemia NOS (D64.9)
151
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D55
Haemolytic anaemias
(D55-D59)
D55
Anaemia due to enzyme disorders
Excludes:
drug-induced enzyme deficiency anaemia D59.2)
D55.0 Anaemia due to glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase [G6PD] deficiency
     Includes:
    Favism
   G6PD deficiency anaemia
D55.1 Anaemia due to other disorders of glutathione metabolism
     Includes:
    Anaemia (due to):
   •
    enzyme deficiencies, except G6PD, related to the hexose monophosphate [HMP] shunt pathway
   •
    haemolytic nonspherocytic (hereditary), type I
D55.2 Anaemia due to disorders of glycolytic enzymes
     Includes:
    Anaemia:
   •
    haemolytic nonspherocytic (hereditary), type II
   •
    hexokinase deficiency
   •
    pyruvate kinase [PK] deficiency
   •
    triose-phosphate isomerase deficiency
D55.3 Anaemia due to disorders of nucleotide metabolism
D55.8 Other anaemias due to enzyme disorders
D55.9 Anaemia due to enzyme disorder, unspecified
D56
Thalassaemia
D56.0 Alpha thalassaemia
     Excludes:
    hydrops fetalis due to haemolytic disease (P56.-)
D56.1 Beta thalassaemia
     Includes:
    Cooley's anaemia
   Severe beta thalassaemia
  Thalassaemia:
 •
  intermedia
 •
  major
D56.2 Delta-beta thalassaemia
D56.3 Thalassaemia trait
D56.4 Hereditary persistence of fetal haemoglobin [HPFH]
D56.8 Other thalassaemias
D56.9 Thalassaemia, unspecified
     Includes:
    Mediterranean anaemia (with other haemoglobinopathy)
   Thalassaemia (minor)(mixed)(with other haemoglobinopathy)
D57
Sickle-cell disorders
Excludes:
other haemoglobinopathies (D58.-)
D57.0 Sickle-cell anaemia with crisis
     Includes:
    Hb-SS disease with crisis
D57.1 Sickle-cell anaemia without crisis
     Includes:
    Sickle-cell:
   •
    anaemia NOS
   •
    disease NOS
   •
    disorder NOS
152
DISEASES OF THE BLOOD AND BLOOD-FORMING ORGANS AND CERTAIN DISORDERS INVOLVING THE IM-
D57.2
Double heterozygous sickling disorders
Includes:
Disease:
•
Hb-SC
•
Hb-SD
•
Hb-SE
•
sickle cell thalassaemia
D57.3 Sickle-cell trait
     Includes:
    Hb-S trait
   Heterozygous haemoglobin S [HbAS]
D57.8 
D59.1
Other sickle-cell disorders
D58
Other hereditary haemolytic anaemias
D58.0 Hereditary spherocytosis
     Includes:
    Acholuric (familial) jaundice
   Congenital (spherocytic) haemolytic icterus
  Minkowski-Chauffard syndrome
D58.1 Hereditary elliptocytosis
     Includes:
    Elliptocytosis (congenital)
   Ovalocytosis (congenital)(hereditary)
D58.2 Other haemoglobinopathies
     Includes:
    Abnormal haemoglobin NOS
   Congenital Heinz body anaemia
  Disease:
 •
  Hb-C
 •
  Hb-D
 •
  Hb-E
 Haemoglobinopathy NOS
Unstable haemoglobin haemolytic disease
Excludes:
familial polycythaemia (D75.0)
Hb-M disease (D74.0)
hereditary persistence of fetal haemoglobin [HPFH] (D56.4)
high-altitude polycythaemia (D75.1)
methaemoglobinaemia (D74.-)
D58.8 Other specified hereditary haemolytic anaemias
     Includes:
    Pyropoikilocytosis
   Stomatocytosis
D58.9 Hereditary haemolytic anaemia, unspecified
D59
Acquired haemolytic anaemia
D59.0 Drug-induced autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
D59.1 Other autoimmune haemolytic anaemias
     Includes:
    Autoimmune haemolytic disease (cold type)(warm type)
   Chronic cold haemagglutinin disease
  Cold agglutinin:
 •
  disease
 •
  haemoglobinuria
 Haemolytic anaemia:
•
 cold type (secondary)(symptomatic)
•
 warm type (secondary)(symptomatic)
Excludes:
Evans' syndrome (D69.30)
haemolytic disease of fetus and newborn (P55.-)
paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria (D59.6)
153
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D59.2 Drug-induced nonautoimmune haemolytic anaemia
     Includes:
    Drug-induced enzyme deficiency anaemia
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
D59.3 Haemolytic-uraemic syndrome
D59.4 Other nonautoimmune haemolytic anaemias
     Includes:
    Haemolytic anaemia:
   •
    mechanical
   •
    microangiopathic
   •
    toxic
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
D59.5 Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria [Marchiafava-Micheli]
     Excludes:
    haemoglobinuria NOS (R82.3)
D59.6 Haemoglobinuria due to haemolysis from other external causes
     Includes:
    Haemoglobinuria:
   •
    from exertion
   •
    march
   •
    paroxysmal cold
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
  Excludes:
 haemoglobinuria NOS (R82.3)
D59.8 Other acquired haemolytic anaemias
D59.9 Acquired haemolytic anaemia, unspecified
     Includes:
    Idiopathic haemolytic anaemia, chronic
D59.2
154
DISEASES OF THE BLOOD AND BLOOD-FORMING ORGANS AND CERTAIN DISORDERS INVOLVING THE IM-
Aplastic and other anaemias
(D60-D64)
D60
D64.0
Acquired pure red cell aplasia [erythroblastopenia]
Includes:
red cell aplasia (acquired)(adult)(with thymoma)
D60.0 Chronic acquired pure red cell aplasia
D60.1 Transient acquired pure red cell aplasia
D60.8 Other acquired pure red cell aplasias
D60.9 Acquired pure red cell aplasia, unspecified
D61
Other aplastic anaemias
Excludes:
agranulocytosis (D70.-)
D61.0 Constitutional aplastic anaemia
     Includes:
    Aplasia, (pure) red cell (of):
   •
    congenital
   •
    infants
   •
    primary
   Blackfan-Diamond syndrome
  Familial hypoplastic anaemia
 Fanconi's anaemia
Pancytopenia with malformations
D61.1 Drug-induced aplastic anaemia
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug
D61.2 Aplastic anaemia due to other external agents
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause
D61.3 Idiopathic aplastic anaemia
D61.8 Other specified aplastic anaemias
D61.9 Aplastic anaemia, unspecified
     Includes:
    Hypoplastic anaemia NOS
   Medullary hypoplasia
  Pancytopenia
 Panmyelophthisis
D62
Acute posthaemorrhagic anaemia
Excludes:
D63*
congenital anaemia from fetal blood loss (P61.3)
Anaemia in chronic diseases classified elsewhere
D63.0* Anaemia in neoplastic disease (C00-D48†)
D63.8* Anaemia in other chronic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Anaemia in chronic kidney disease >= stage 3 (N18.3-N18.5 †)
D64
Other anaemias
Excludes:
D64.0
refractory anaemia:
•
NOS (D46.4)
•
sideroblasts (D46.1)
•
with excess of blasts (D46.2):
•
with transformation (D46.3)
•
without sideroblasts (D46.0)
Hereditary sideroblastic anaemia
Includes:
Sex-linked hypochromic sideroblastic anaemia
155
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D64.1 
D64.1
Secondary sideroblastic anaemia due to disease
Use additional code to identify disease
D64.2 Secondary sideroblastic anaemia due to drugs and toxins
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause
D64.3 Other sideroblastic anaemias
     Includes:
    Sideroblastic anaemia:
   •
    NOS
   •
    pyridoxine-responsive NEC
D64.4 Congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia
     Includes:
    Dyshaematopoietic anaemia (congenital)
   Excludes:
  Blackfan-Diamond syndrome (D61.0)
 Di Guglielmo's disease (C94.0)
D64.8 Other specified anaemias
     Includes:
    Infantile pseudoleukaemia
   Leukoerythroblastic anaemia
D64.9 Anaemia, unspecified
156
DISEASES OF THE BLOOD AND BLOOD-FORMING ORGANS AND CERTAIN DISORDERS INVOLVING THE IM-
Coagulation defects, purpura and other haemorrhagic
conditions
(D65-D69)
D65
Disseminated intravascular coagulation [defibrination syndrome]
Includes:
Excludes:
D66
Excludes:
Christmas disease
Deficiency:
•
factor IX (with functional defect)
•
plasma thromboplastin component [PTC]
Haemophilia B
Other coagulation defects
Excludes:
D68.0
Deficiency factor VIII (with functional defect)
Haemophilia:
•
A
•
NOS
•
classical
factor VIII deficiency with vascular defect (D68.0)
Hereditary factor IX deficiency
Includes:
D68
Afibrinogenaemia, acquired
Consumption coagulopathy
Diffuse or disseminated intravascular coagulation [DIC]
Fibrinolytic haemorrhage, acquired
Purpura:
•
fibrinolytic
•
fulminans
that (complicating):
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07)O08.1)
•
in newborn (P60)
•
pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O45.-)(O46.-)(O67.-)(O72.3-)
Hereditary factor VIII deficiency
Includes:
D67
D68.0
those complicating:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07) O08.1)
•
pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O45.-)(O46.-)(O67.-)(O72.3-)
Von Willebrand's disease
Includes:
Angiohaemophilia
Factor VIII deficiency with vascular defect
Vascular haemophilia
Excludes:
capillary fragility (hereditary) (D69.8)
factor VIII deficiency:
•
NOS (D66)
•
with functional defect (D66)
157
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D68.1 Hereditary factor XI deficiency
     Includes:
    Haemophilia C
   Plasma thromboplastin antecedent [PTA] deficiency
D68.2 Hereditary deficiency of other clotting factors
     Includes:
    Congenital afibrinogenaemia
   Deficiency:
  •
   AC globulin
  •
   proaccelerin
  Deficiency of factor:
 •
  I [fibrinogen]
 •
  II [prothrombin]
 •
  V [labile]
 •
  VII [stable]
 •
  X [Stuart-Prower]
 •
  XII [Hageman]
 •
  XIII [fibrin-stabilizing]
 Dysfibrinogenaemia (congenital)
Hypoproconvertinaemia
Owren's disease
D68.3 Haemorrhagic disorder due to circulating anticoagulants
     Includes:
    Haemorrhage during long term use of anticoagulants
   Haemorrhagic disorder due to warfarin or like drugs
  Hyperheparinaemia
 Increase in:
•
 anti-IXa
•
 anti-VIIIa
•
 anti-Xa
•
 anti-XIa
•
 antithrombin
Non traumatic hematoma due to circulating anticoagulants
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify any administered anticoagulant
Excludes:
longterm use of anticoagulants without haemorrhage (Z92.1)
D68.4 Acquired coagulation factor deficiency
     Includes:
    Deficiency of coagulation factor due to:
   •
    disease process
   •
    liver disease
   •
    vitamin K deficiency
   Hyperprothrombinaemia causing coagulation factor deficiency
  Excludes:
 vitamin K deficiency of newborn (P53)
D68.5 Primary Thrombophilia
     Includes:
    Activated protein C resistance [factor V Leiden mutation]
   Deficiency:
  •
   antithrombin, antithrombin III
  •
   protein C
  •
   protein S
  Prothrombin gene mutation
D68.6 Other Thrombophilia
     Includes:
    Anticardiolipin syndrome
   Antiphospholipid syndrome
  Presence of lupus anticoagulant
 Excludes:
disseminated intravascular coagulation (D65)
hyperhomocysteinemia (E72.1)
systemic lupus erthematosus [SLE] with lupus anticoagulant (M32.-)
D68.8 Other specified coagulation defects
D68.9 Coagulation defect, unspecified
D68.1
158
DISEASES OF THE BLOOD AND BLOOD-FORMING ORGANS AND CERTAIN DISORDERS INVOLVING THE IM-
D69
Purpura and other haemorrhagic conditions
Excludes:
benign hypergammaglobulinaemic purpura (D89.0)
cryoglobulinaemic purpura (D89.1)
essential (haemorrhagic) thrombocythaemia (D47.3)
purpura fulminans (D65)
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (M31.1)
D69.0 Allergic purpura
     Includes:
    Purpura:
   •
    anaphylactoid
   •
    Henoch(-Schönlein)
    •
     nonthrombocytopenic:
    •
     haemorrhagic
    •
     idiopathic
    •
     vascular
    Vasculitis, allergic
D69.1 Qualitative platelet defects
     Includes:
    Bernard-Soulier [giant platelet] syndrome
   Glanzmann's disease
  Grey platelet syndrome
 Thromboasthenia (haemorrhagic)(hereditary)
Thrombocytopathy
Excludes:
von Willebrand's disease (D68.0)
D69.2 Other nonthrombocytopenic purpura
     Includes:
    Purpura:
   •
    NOS
   •
    senile
   •
    simplex
D69.3 Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
D69.30o Evans' syndrome
D69.38o Other idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
D69.4 Other primary thrombocytopenia
     Excludes:
    thrombocytopenia with absent radius (Q87.2)
   transient neonatal thrombocytopenia (P61.0)
  Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (D82.0)
D69.5 Secondary thrombocytopenia
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
D69.6 Thrombocytopenia, unspecified
D69.8 Other specified haemorrhagic conditions
     Includes:
    Capillary fragility (hereditary)
   Vascular pseudohaemophilia
D69.9 
D69.9
Haemorrhagic condition, unspecified
159
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D70
Other diseases of blood and blood-forming organs
(D70-D77)
D70
Agranulocytosis
Use additional code to identify any mucositis (ulcerative) (of):
•
gastrointestinal tract (K92.80)
•
nose and nasal sinuses (J34.80)
•
oral cavity (oropharynx) (K12.3)
•
vagina and vulva (N76.80)
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
D70.0o Neutropenia
      Includes:
     Neutropenia:
    •
     NOS
    •
     congenital
    •
     cyclic
    •
     drug-induced
    •
     periodic
    •
     splenic (primary)
    •
     toxic
    Neutropenic splenomegaly
   Excludes:
  transient neonatal neutropenia (P61.5)
D70.8o Other agranulocytosis
      Includes:
     Agranulocytic angina
    Infantile genetic agranulocytosis
   Kostmann's disease
  Werner-Schultz disease
D71
Functional disorders of polymorphonuclear neutrophils
Includes:
D72
Cell membrane receptor complex [CR3] defect
Chronic (childhood) granulomatous disease
Congenital dysphagocytosis
Progressive septic granulomatosis
Other disorders of white blood cells
Excludes:
abnormal white blood cell (counts) (R72)
basophilia (D75.8)
immunity disorders (D80-D89)
neutropenia (D70.0)
preleukaemia (syndrome) (D46.9)
D72.0 Genetic anomalies of leukocytes
     Includes:
    Anomaly (granulation)(granulocyte) or syndrome:
   •
    Alder
   •
    May-Hegglin
   •
    Pelger-Huët
    Hereditary:
   •
    leukocytic:
   •
    hypersegmentation
   •
    hyposegmentation
   •
    leukomelanopathy
   Excludes:
  Chediak(-Steinbrinck)-Higashi syndrome (E70.3)
D72.1 Eosinophilia
     Includes:
    Eosinophilia:
   •
    allergic
   •
    hereditary
160
DISEASES OF THE BLOOD AND BLOOD-FORMING ORGANS AND CERTAIN DISORDERS INVOLVING THE IM-
D72.8
D72.9
D73
Other specified disorders of white blood cells
Includes:
Leukaemoid reaction:
•
lymphocytic
•
monocytic
•
myelocytic
Leukocytosis
Lymphocytosis (symptomatic)
Lymphopenia
Monocytosis (symptomatic)
Plasmacytosis
D74.9
Disorder of white blood cells, unspecified
Diseases of spleen
D73.0 Hyposplenism
     Includes:
    Asplenia, postsurgical
   Atrophy of spleen
  Excludes:
 asplenia (congenital) (Q89.0)
D73.1 Hypersplenism
     Excludes:
    splenomegaly:
   •
    NOS (R16.1)
   •
    congenital (Q89.0)
D73.2 Chronic congestive splenomegaly
D73.3 Abscess of spleen
D73.4 Cyst of spleen
D73.5 Infarction of spleen
     Includes:
    Splenic rupture, nontraumatic
   Torsion of spleen
  Excludes:
 traumatic rupture of spleen (S36.0)
D73.8 Other diseases of spleen
     Includes:
    Fibrosis of spleen NOS
   Perisplenitis
  Splenitis NOS
D73.9 Disease of spleen, unspecified
D74
Methaemoglobinaemia
D74.0 Congenital methaemoglobinaemia
     Includes:
    Congenital NADH-methaemoglobin reductase deficiency
   Haemoglobin-M [Hb-M] disease
  Methaemoglobinaemia, hereditary
D74.8 Other methaemoglobinaemias
     Includes:
    Acquired methaemoglobinaemia (with sulfhaemoglobinaemia)
   Toxic methaemoglobinaemia
  Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause
D74.9 Methaemoglobinaemia, unspecified
161
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D75
Other diseases of blood and blood-forming organs
Excludes:
D75
enlarged lymph nodes (R59.-)
hypergammaglobulinaemia NOS (D89.2)
lymphadenitis:
•
NOS (I88.9)
•
acute (L04.-)
•
chronic (I88.1)
•
mesenteric (acute)(chronic) (I88.0)
D75.0 Familial erythrocytosis
     Includes:
    Polycythaemia:
   •
    benign
   •
    familial
   Excludes:
  hereditary ovalocytosis (D58.1)
D75.1 Secondary polycythaemia
     Includes:
    Erythrocytosis NOS
   Polycythaemia
  •
   acquired
  •
   due to:
  •
   emotional
  •
   hypoxaemic
  •
   nephrogenous
  •
   relative
  •
   •
    erythropoietin
   •
    fall in plasma volume
   •
    high altitude
   •
    stress
   Excludes:
  polycythaemia:
 •
  neonatorum (P61.1)
 •
  vera (D45)
D75.2 Secondary thrombocytosis
     Includes:
    Post-splenectomy thrombocytosis
   Reactive thrombocytosis
  Excludes:
 essential:
•
 (haemorrhagic) thrombocythaemia (D47.3)
•
 thrombocytosis (D47.3)
D75.8 Other specified diseases of blood and blood-forming organs
     Includes:
    Basophilia
D75.9 Disease of blood and blood-forming organs, unspecified
D76
Certain diseases involving lymphoreticular tissue and reticulohistiocytic
system
Excludes:
Letterer-Siwe disease (C96.0)
malignant histiocytosis (C96.1)
reticuloendotheliosis or reticulosis:
•
histiocytic medullary (C96.1)
•
leukaemic (C91.4)
•
lipomelanotic (I89.8)
•
malignant (C85.7)
•
nonlipid (C96.0)
D76.0 Langerhans' cell histiocytosis, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Eosinophilic granuloma
   Hand-Schüller-Christian disease
   Histiocytosis X (chronic)
D76.1 Haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
     Includes:
    Familial haemophagocytic reticulosis
   Histiocytoses of mononuclear phagocytes other than Langerhans' cells NOS
162
DISEASES OF THE BLOOD AND BLOOD-FORMING ORGANS AND CERTAIN DISORDERS INVOLVING THE IM-
D76.2 Haemophagocytic syndrome, infection-associated
     Use additional code to identify infectious agent or disease
D76.3 Other histiocytosis syndromes
     Includes:
    Reticulohistiocytoma (giant-cell)
   Sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy
  Xanthogranuloma
D77*
D77*
Other disorders of blood and blood-forming organs in diseases classified
elsewhere
Includes:
Fibrosis of spleen in schistosomiasis [bilharziasis] (B65.-†)
163
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D80
Certain disorders involving the immune mechanism
(D80-D89)
Includes:
Excludes:
D80
defects in the complement system
immunodeficiency disorders, except human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease
sarcoidosis
autoimmune disease (systemic) NOS (M35.9)
functional disorders of polymorphonuclear neutrophils (D71)
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease (B24)
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease in pregnancy (O98.7-)
Immunodeficiency with predominantly antibody defects
D80.0 Hereditary hypogammaglobulinaemia
     Includes:
    Autosomal recessive agammaglobulinaemia (Swiss type)
   X-linked agammaglobulinaemia [Bruton] (with growth hormone deficiency)
D80.1 Nonfamilial hypogammaglobulinaemia
     Includes:
    Agammaglobulinaemia with immunoglobulin-bearing B-lymphocytes
   Common variable agammaglobulinaemia [CVAgamma]
  Hypogammaglobulinaemia NOS
D80.2 Selective deficiency of immunoglobulin A [IgA]
D80.3 Selective deficiency of immunoglobulin G [IgG] subclasses
D80.4 Selective deficiency of immunoglobulin M [IgM]
D80.5 Immunodeficiency with increased immunoglobulin M [IgM]
     Excludes:
    Waldenstrom's macroglobulinaemia (C88.00)
D80.6 Antibody deficiency with near-normal immunoglobulins or with hyperimmunoglobulinaemia
D80.7 Transient hypogammaglobulinaemia of infancy
D80.8 Other immunodeficiencies with predominantly antibody defects
     Includes:
    Kappa light chain deficiency
D80.9 Immunodeficiency with predominantly antibody defects, unspecified
D81
Combined immunodeficiencies
Excludes:
autosomal recessive agammaglobulinaemia (Swiss type) (D80.0)
D81.0 Severe combined immunodeficiency [SCID] with reticular dysgenesis
D81.1 Severe combined immunodeficiency [SCID] with low T- and B-cell numbers
D81.2 Severe combined immunodeficiency [SCID] with low or normal B-cell numbers
D81.3 Adenosine deaminase [ADA] deficiency
D81.4 Nezelof's syndrome
D81.5 Purine nucleoside phosphorylase [PNP] deficiency
D81.6 Major histocompatibility complex class I deficiency
     Includes:
    Bare lymphocyte syndrome
D81.7 Major histocompatibility complex class II deficiency
D81.8 Other combined immunodeficiencies
     Includes:
    Biotin-dependent carboxylase deficiency
D81.9 Combined immunodeficiency, unspecified
     Includes:
    Severe combined immunodeficiency disorder [SCID] NOS
164
DISEASES OF THE BLOOD AND BLOOD-FORMING ORGANS AND CERTAIN DISORDERS INVOLVING THE IM-
D82
Immunodeficiency associated with other major defects
Excludes:
ataxia telangiectasia [Louis-Bar] (G11.3)
D82.0 D82.1 Di George's syndrome
           Includes:
          Pharyngeal pouch syndrome
         Thymic:
        •
         alymphoplasia
        •
         aplasia or hypoplasia with immunodeficiency
D82.2 Immunodeficiency with short-limbed stature
D82.3 Immunodeficiency following hereditary defective response to Epstein-Barr virus
     Includes:
    X-linked lymphoproliferative disease
D82.4 Hyperimmunoglobulin E [IgE] syndrome
D82.8 Immunodeficiency associated with other specified major defects
D82.9 
D86.9
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
Includes:
Immunodeficiency with thrombocytopenia and eczema
Immunodeficiency associated with major defect, unspecified
D83
Common variable immunodeficiency
D83.0 Common variable immunodeficiency with predominant abnormalities of B-cell numbers and
     function
D83.1 Common variable immunodeficiency with predominant immunoregulatory T-cell disorders
D83.2 Common variable immunodeficiency with autoantibodies to B- or T-cells
D83.8 Other common variable immunodeficiencies
D83.9 Common variable immunodeficiency, unspecified
D84
Other immunodeficiencies
D84.0 Lymphocyte function antigen-1 [LFA-1] defect
D84.1 Defects in the complement system
     Includes:
    C1 esterase inhibitor [C1-INH] deficiency
D84.8 Other specified immunodeficiencies
D84.9 Immunodeficiency, unspecified
D86
Sarcoidosis
D86.0 Sarcoidosis of lung
D86.1 Sarcoidosis of lymph nodes
D86.2 Sarcoidosis of lung with sarcoidosis of lymph nodes
D86.3 Sarcoidosis of skin
D86.8 Sarcoidosis of other and combined sites
     Includes:
    Iridocyclitis in sarcoidosis† (H22.1*)
     Multiple cranial nerve palsies in sarcoidosis† (G53.2*)
      Sarcoid:
     •
      arthropathy† (M14.8*)
       •
        myocarditis† (I41.8*)
         •
          myositis† (M63.3*)
           Uveoparotid fever [Heerfordt]
D86.9 Sarcoidosis, unspecified
165
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
D89
Other disorders involving the immune mechanism, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
D89
hyperglobulinaemia NOS (R77.1)
monoclonal gammopathy (D47.2)
transplant failure and rejection (T86.-)
D89.0 Polyclonal hypergammaglobulinaemia
     Includes:
    Benign hypergammaglobulinaemic purpura
   Polyclonal gammopathy NOS
D89.1 Cryoglobulinaemia
     Includes:
    Cryoglobulinaemia:
   •
    essential
   •
    idiopathic
   •
    mixed
   •
    primary
   •
    secondary
   Cryoglobulinaemic:
  •
   purpura
  •
   vasculitis
D89.2 Hypergammaglobulinaemia, unspecified
D89.3 Immune reconstitution syndrome
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX), to identify drug.
D89.8 Other specified disorders involving the immune mechanism, not elsewhere classified
D89.9 Disorder involving the immune mechanism, unspecified
     Includes:
    Immune disease NOS
166
I
CHAPTER IV
Endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases
(E00-E90)
Note:
Excludes:
All neoplasms, whether functionally active or not, are classified in Chapter II. Appropriate codes in this chapter
(i.e. E05.8)(E07.0) (E16-E31)(E34.-) may be used, if desired, as additional codes to indicate either functional
activity by neoplasms and ectopic endocrine tissue or hyperfunction and hypofunction of endocrine glands
associated with neoplasms and other conditions classified elsewhere.
complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O00-O99)
symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified (R00-R99)
transitory endocrine and metabolic disorders specific to fetus and newborn (P70-P74)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
E00-E07
E10-E14
E15-E16
E20-E35
E40-E46
E50-E64
E65-E68
E70-E90
Disorders of thyroid gland
Diabetes mellitus
Other disorders of glucose regulation and pancreatic internal secretion
Disorders of other endocrine glands
Malnutrition
Other nutritional deficiencies
Obesity and other hyperalimentation
Metabolic disorders
Asterisk categories for this chapter are provided as follows:
E35*
E90*
Disorders of endocrine glands in diseases classified elsewhere
Nutritional and metabolic disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
167
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E00
Disorders of thyroid gland
(E00-E07)
E00
Congenital iodine-deficiency syndrome
Note:
Endemic conditions associated with environmental iodine deficiency either directly or as a
consequence of maternal iodine deficiency. Some of the conditions have no current
hypothyroidism but are the consequence of inadequate thyroid hormone secretion in the
developing fetus. Environmental goitrogens may be associated.
Use additional code (F70-F79) to identify associated mental retardation.
Excludes:
subclinical iodine-deficiency hypothyroidism (E02)
E00.0 Congenital iodine-deficiency syndrome, neurological type
     Includes:
    Endemic cretinism, neurological type
E00.1 Congenital iodine-deficiency syndrome, myxoedematous type
     Includes:
    Endemic cretinism:
   •
    hypothyroid
   •
    myxoedematous type
E00.2 Congenital iodine-deficiency syndrome, mixed type
     Includes:
    Endemic cretinism, mixed type
E00.9 Congenital iodine-deficiency syndrome, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital iodine-deficiency hypothyroidism NOS
   Endemic cretinism NOS
E01
Iodine-deficiency-related thyroid disorders and allied conditions
Excludes:
congenital iodine-deficiency syndrome (E00.-)
subclinical iodine-deficiency hypothyroidism (E02)
E01.0 Iodine-deficiency-related diffuse (endemic) goitre
E01.1 Iodine-deficiency-related multinodular (endemic) goitre
     Includes:
    Iodine-deficiency-related nodular goitre
E01.2 Iodine-deficiency-related (endemic) goitre, unspecified
     Includes:
    Endemic goitre NOS
E01.8 Other iodine-deficiency-related thyroid disorders and allied conditions
     Includes:
    Acquired iodine-deficiency hypothyroidism NOS
E02 Subclinical iodine-deficiency hypothyroidism
E03 Other hypothyroidism
Excludes:
iodine-deficiency-related hypothyroidism (E00-E02)
postprocedural hypothyroidism (E89.0)
E03.0 Congenital hypothyroidism with diffuse goitre
     Includes:
    Goitre (nontoxic) congenital:
   •
    NOS
   •
    parenchymatous
   Excludes:
  transitory congenital goitre with normal function (P72.0)
E03.1 Congenital hypothyroidism without goitre
     Includes:
    Aplasia of thyroid (with myxoedema)
   Congenital:
  •
   atrophy of thyroid
  •
   hypothyroidism NOS
E03.2 Hypothyroidism due to medicaments and other exogenous substances
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
E03.3 Postinfectious hypothyroidism
168
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E03.4 Atrophy of thyroid (acquired)
     Excludes:
    congenital atrophy of thyroid (E03.1)
E03.5 Myxoedema coma
E03.8 Other specified hypothyroidism
E03.9 Hypothyroidism, unspecified
     Includes:
    Myxoedema NOS
E04
E05.9
Other nontoxic goitre
Excludes:
congenital goitre:
•
NOS (E03.0)
•
diffuse (E03.0)
•
parenchymatous (E03.0)
iodine-deficiency-related goitre (E00-E02)
E04.0 Nontoxic diffuse goitre
     Includes:
    Goitre, nontoxic:
   •
    diffuse (colloid)
   •
    simple
E04.1 Nontoxic single thyroid nodule
     Includes:
    Colloid nodule (cystic)(thyroid)
   Nontoxic uninodular goitre
  Thyroid (cystic) nodule NOS
E04.2 Nontoxic multinodular goitre
     Includes:
    Cystic goitre NOS
   Multinodular (cystic) goitre NOS
E04.8 Other specified nontoxic goitre
E04.9 Nontoxic goitre, unspecified
     Includes:
    Goitre NOS
   Nodular goitre (nontoxic) NOS
E05
Thyrotoxicosis [hyperthyroidism]
Excludes:
chronic thyroiditis with transient thyrotoxicosis (E06.2)
neonatal thyrotoxicosis (P72.1)
E05.0 Thyrotoxicosis with diffuse goitre
     Includes:
    Exophthalmic or toxic goitre NOS
   Graves' disease
  Toxic diffuse goitre
E05.1 Thyrotoxicosis with toxic single thyroid nodule
     Includes:
    Thyrotoxicosis with toxic uninodular goitre
E05.2 Thyrotoxicosis with toxic multinodular goitre
     Includes:
    Toxic nodular goitre NOS
E05.3 Thyrotoxicosis from ectopic thyroid tissue
E05.4 Thyrotoxicosis factitia
E05.5 Thyroid crisis or storm
E05.8 Other thyrotoxicosis
     Includes:
    Overproduction of thyroid-stimulating hormone
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
E05.9 Thyrotoxicosis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Hyperthyroidism NOS
   Thyrotoxic heart disease† (I43.8*)
169
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E06
Thyroiditis
Excludes:
E06
postpartum thyroiditis (O90.5)
E06.0 Acute thyroiditis
     Includes:
    Abscess of thyroid
   Thyroiditis:
  •
   pyogenic
  •
   suppurative
  Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
E06.1 Subacute thyroiditis
     Includes:
    Thyroiditis:
   •
    de Quervain
   •
    giant-cell
   •
    granulomatous
   •
    nonsuppurative
   Excludes:
  autoimmune thyroiditis (E06.3)
E06.2 Chronic thyroiditis with transient thyrotoxicosis
     Excludes:
    autoimmune thyroiditis (E06.3)
E06.3 Autoimmune thyroiditis
     Includes:
    Hashimoto's thyroiditis
   Hashitoxicosis (transient)
  Lymphadenoid goitre
 Lymphocytic thyroiditis
Struma lymphomatosa
E06.4 Drug-induced thyroiditis
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
E06.5 Other chronic thyroiditis
     Includes:
    Thyroiditis:
   •
    chronic:
   •
    NOS
   •
    fibrous
   •
    ligneous
   •
    Riedel
E06.9 Thyroiditis, unspecified
E07
Other disorders of thyroid
E07.0 Hypersecretion of calcitonin
     Includes:
    C-cell hyperplasia of thyroid
   Hypersecretion of thyrocalcitonin
E07.1 Dyshormogenetic goitre
     Includes:
    Familial dyshormogenetic goitre
   Pendred's syndrome
  Excludes:
 transitory congenital goitre with normal function (P72.0)
E07.8 Other specified disorders of thyroid
     Includes:
    Abnormality of thyroid-binding globulin
   Haemorrhage
  of thyroid
 Infarction
E07.81o Sick-euthyroid syndrome
E07.88o Other specified disorders of thyroid
E07.9 Disorder of thyroid, unspecified
170
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
Diabetes mellitus
(E10-E14)
E10.20†o
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
Excludes:
metabolic syndrome (dysmetabolic syndrome) (syndrome X) (insulin resistance syndrome) (E88.80)
E10
Type 1 diabetes mellitus
Includes:
Excludes:
Diabetes (mellitus):
•
autoimmune
•
brittle
•
idiopathic
•
insulin dependent
•
juvenile onset
diabetes mellitus (in):
•
NOS (E14.-)
•
neonatal (P70.2)
•
other specified (E13.-)
•
pregnancy (gestational), childbirth and the puerperium (O24.-)
•
renal glycosuria (E74.8)
•
type 2 (E11.-)
due to genetic defect (in) (of) beta-cell function, insulin action (E13.-)
impaired carbohydrate tolerance (pre-diabetes) (R73.0)
maturity onset diabetes of the young [MODY] (E13.-)
non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus of the young [NIDDMY] (E11.-)
post-procedural hypoinsulinaemia of the non-diabetic (E89.1)
E10.0 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with coma
     Includes:
    Type 1 diabetic coma (ketotic) (non-ketotic) (hyperosmolar) (hyperglycaemic) (hypoglycaemic)
   Use additional code to identify any:
  •
   hyperosmolality [hyperosmolarity] and hypernatraemia (E87.0)
  •
   hypoglycemia (E10.63)
  •
   ketoacidosis and lactic acidosis (E10.1-)
E10.1 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with acidosis
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     presence of cerebral edema (G93.6)
E10.10o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis
       Includes:
      Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      (ketotic) hyperglycemia
     •
      ketoacidosis (DKA)
     •
      ketone formation with acidosis
     Excludes:
    that with lactic acidosis (E10.12)
E10.11o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with lactic acidosis
       Excludes:
      that with ketoacidosis (E10.12)
E10.12o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis with lactic acidosis
E10.2 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with kidney complications
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E10.64)
E10.20†o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with incipient diabetic nephropathy (N08.3-*)
          Includes:
         Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         conditions classified in N18.1 - N18.2 (N08.31* - N08.32*)
        •
         glomerular basement-membrane thickening
        •
         glomerular mesangial expansion
        •
         incipient nephropathy (early) (mild) (reversible)
        •
         microalbuminuria (constant) (persistent)
171
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E10.23†o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with established or advanced kidney disease (N08.3-*)
          Includes:
         Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         chronic kidney (renal):
        •
         failure
        •
         impairment
        •
         conditions classified in N18.3 - N18.5 (N08.33* - N08.35*)
        •
         end-stage kidney disease (ESKD)
        •
         established diabetic nephropathy
        •
         glomerulosclerosis (diffuse) (intracapillary) (nodular)
        •
         Kimmelstiel-Wilson (disease) (lesion)
        •
         macroalbuminuria
        •
         nephropathy (advanced) (progressive) (NOS)
        •
         nephrosis
        •
         nephrotic syndrome
        •
         proteinuria (constant) (persistent)
E10.28o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other specified kidney complication not elsewhere classified
       Includes:
      Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      Ebstein's disease (renal tubular degeneration in diabetes) † (N16.3*)
       •
        glomerulonephritis † (N08.38*)
         •
          pyelonephritis † (N08.38*)
           Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
          •
           acute renal failure with medullary (papillary) necrosis (N17.2)
          •
           acute renal failure, unspecified (N17.9)
          •
           postprocedural renal failure (N99.0)
E10.3 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with ophthalmic complications
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E10.64)
E10.30†o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with background retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         nonproliferative retinopathy
        •
         retinal dot-and-blot hemorrhages, hard exudates, microaneurysms
        •
         retinopathy NOS
        Excludes:
       type 1 diabetes mellitus with maculopathy (E10.33)
E10.31†o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with preproliferative retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Type 1 diabetes mellitus with intraretinal microvascular abnormalities [IRMA]:
        •
         cotton-wool spots
        •
         hemorrhages (blotchy) (round) (small)
        •
         ischemia
        •
         venous beading, looping, reduplication
E10.32†o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with proliferative retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         preretinal hemorrhage
        •
         retinal neovascularization (new vessel formation)
E10.33†o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         advanced retinopathy
        •
         macular - degeneration, edema (focal) (generalized) (intraretinal), star
        •
         maculopathy (circinate) (ischemic)
        •
         retinal thickening
        Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
       •
        retinal detachment with retinal traction (H33.4)
       •
        vitreous hemorrhage (H43.1)
       Excludes:
      postprocedural vitreous hemorrhage (H59.0)
E10.35†o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic cataract (H28.0*)
          Excludes:
         Type 1 diabetes with senile [age-related] cataract (E10.38)
E10.23†
172
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E10.36o
Type 1 diabetes mellitus with advanced ophthalmic disease
Includes:
Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
•
glaucoma (neovascular) † (H42.0*)
•
ischemic optic neuropathy † (H36.0*)
•
retinal artery occlusion † (H36.0*)
•
retinal vein occlusion † (H36.0*)
E10.38o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other specified ophthalmic complication not elsewhere
       classified
      Includes:
     Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
    •
     iritis (iridocyclitis) † (H22.1*)
      •
       retinitis † (H36.0*)
        Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
       •
        keratopathy (H18.9)
       •
        senile [age-related] cataract (H25.-)
E10.4† Type 1 diabetes mellitus with neurological complications
        Use additional code to identify any:
       •
        type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E10.64)
E10.40†o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with mononeuropathy
          Includes:
         Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         amyotrophy (G73.0*)
        •
         carpal tunnel syndrome (G59.0*)
        •
         cranial nerve palsy - III (oculomotor), VI (abducens) (G59.0*)
        •
         femoral neuropathy (G59.0*)
        •
         mononeuritis multiplex (G59.0*)
        •
         mononeuropathy (G59.0*)
        •
         myasthenia gravis (G73.0*)
        •
         myasthenic syndromes (G73.0*)
        •
         ophthalmoplegia (G59.0*)
        •
         radiculopathy - thoracic, truncal (G59.0*)
        •
         ulnar nerve compression or entrapment (G59.0*)
        Excludes:
       type 1 diabetes mellitus with autonomic (mono)neuropathy (E10.42)
E10.41†o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with polyneuropathy (G63.2*)
          Includes:
         Type 1 Diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         insulin neuritis
        •
         neuropathic cachexia
        •
         neuropathy NOS
        •
         peripheral neuropathy (distal symmetrical) (selective small fibre) (sensorimotor) (NOS)
        Excludes:
       type 1 diabetes mellitus with autonomic (poly)neuropathy (E10.42)
E10.42†o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with autonomic neuropathy (G99.0*)
          Includes:
         Type 1 Diabetes mellitus with autonomic mononeuropathy/polyneuropathy:
        •
         abnormal sweating (gustatory)
        •
         anorectal dysfunction
        •
         diarrhea (functional)
        •
         erectile failure (impotence)
        •
         gastroparesis
        •
         hypotonic bladder
        •
         neuropathic edema
        •
         oesophageal dysfunction
        •
         postural hypotension
E10.5 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with circulatory complications
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E10.64)
E10.50†o 
E10.50†o
Type 1 diabetes mellitus with peripheral angiopathy (I79.2*)
Includes:
Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
•
 intermittent claudication
•
 peripheral vascular disease, unspecified (PVD)
•
 spasm of artery
Excludes:
type 1 diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (E10.70)
173
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E10.51†o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with peripheral angiopathy with gangrene (I79.2*)
          Code separately any gas gangrene (A48.0)
         Excludes:
        type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
       •
        foot ulcer with gangrene (E10.71)
       •
        Fournier's gangrene (E10.68)
       •
        Meleney's gangrene (E10.68)
       •
        ulcer (on ankle or any part of lower limb, except foot) (E10.68)
E10.52o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with certain circulatory complications
       Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
      •
       acute ischaemic heart disease (I24.-)
      •
       angina (I20.-)
      •
       cardiomyopathy (I42.9)
      •
       cerebrovascular diseases (I60-169)
      •
       chronic ischaemic heart disease (I25.-)
      •
       heart failure (I50.-)
      •
       multiinfarct dementia (F01.1)
      •
       myocardial infarction (I21-I22)
      •
       transient cerebral ischaemic attack (TIA) (G45.9)
E10.6 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other specified complications
E10.60o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with musculoskeletal and connective tissue complication
       Includes:
      Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      bone change † (M90.8*)
       •
        diabetic arthropathy (osteoarthropathy) (cheiroarthropathy) † (M14.2*)
         •
          diabetic hand syndrome † (M14.2*)
           •
            diabetic neuropathic (Charcot's) arthropathy † (M14.6*)
             •
              Dupuytren's contracture † (M73.8*)
               •
                osteoporosis † (M82.1*)
                 •
                  periarthritis of shoulder [frozen shoulder] † (M14.2*)
                   Code separately any osteoporosis with pathological fracture (M80.8-)
                  Use additional code to identify any:
                 •
                  type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E10.64)
E10.61o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with skin and subcutaneous tissue complication
       Includes:
      Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      bullosis diabeticorum (diabetic bullae) † (L14*)
       •
        diabetic dermopathy † (L99.8*)
         •
          diabetic periungual telangiectasia † (L62.8*)
           •
            necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum (NLD) † (L99.8*)
             •
              scleroderma (systemic) † (M36.8*)
               Use additional code to identify any:
              •
               type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E10.64)
E10.62o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with periodontal complication
       Includes:
      Type 1 diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      periodontal abscess
     •
      periodontal disease NOS
     •
      periodontitis (acute) (chronic)
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E10.64)
E10.63o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with hypoglycaemia
       Code separately any associated type 1 diabetes mellitus with diabetic coma (E10.0)
E10.64o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described
       Includes:
      Type 1 diabetes mellitus:
     •
      for stabilization
     •
      uncontrolled
     •
      unstable
     •
      with secondary treatment failure
     Excludes:
    type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor control (hyperglycemia) with:
   •
    acidosis (E10.1-)
   •
    coma (E10.0)
E10.51†
174
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E10.68o
Type 1 diabetes mellitus with other specified complication, not elsewhere classified
Use additional code to identify any:
•
type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E10.64)
Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
•
Fournier's gangrene (acute dermal) (bacterial) (haemolytic)
•
female ( N76.88)
•
male ( N49.3)
•
decubitus ulcer (not foot) (L89 .-)
•
fibrous breast disease (mastopathy) sclerosing lymphocytic lobulitis (N61 )
•
Meleney's gangrene (progressive bacterial synergistic) (L98.4 )
•
necrotizing fasciitis (M72.6- )
•
skin ulcer (chronic) (NOS) (L98.4 )
•
skin ulcer of lower limb (not foot) (L97 )
Excludes:
type 1 diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (E10.70)
E10.7 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with multiple complications
     Includes:
    Diabetic foot
   Use additional code to identify any:
  •
   type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E10.64)
E10.70o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (angiopathic) (neuropathic)
       Excludes:
      type 1 diabetes mellitus with lower limb ulcer not involving foot (E10.68)
E10.71o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (angiopathic) (neuropathic) with gangrene
       Excludes:
      type 1 diabetes mellitus with gangrenous lower limb ulcer not involving foot (E10.51)
E10.78o Type 1 diabetes mellitus with multiple other complications
       Includes:
      Type 1 diabetes mellitus with multiple (unspecified) complications
E10.9 
E11.1
Type 1 diabetes mellitus without (mention of) complication
Includes:
Insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) NOS
Type 1 diabetes mellitus NOS
Use additional code to identify any:
•
 type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E10.64)
E11
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
Includes:
Excludes:
Diabetes (mellitus)(nonobese)(obese):
•
adult-onset
•
due to insulin secretory defect
•
insulin resistant
•
maturity-onset
•
non insulin dependent diabetes mellitus of young [NIDDMY]
diabetes mellitus (in):
•
NOS (E14.-)
•
neonatal (P70.2)
•
other specified (E13.-)
•
pregnancy (gestational), childbirth and the puerperium (O24.-)
•
renal glycosuria (E74.8)
•
type 1 (E10.-)
due to genetic defect (in) (of) beta-cell function, insulin action (E13.-)
impaired carbohydrate tolerance (pre-diabetes) (R73.0)
insulin dependent diabetes mellitus of the young [IDDMY] (E10.-)
maturity onset diabetes of the young [MODY] (E13.-)
post-procedural hypoinsulinaemia of the non-diabetic (E89.1)
E11.0 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with coma
     Includes:
    Type 2 diabetic coma (ketotic) (non-ketotic) (hyperosmolar) (hyperglycaemic) (hypoglycaemic)
   Use additional code to identify any:
  •
   hyperosmolality [hyperosmolarity] and hypernatraemia (E87.0)
  •
   hypoglycemia (E11.63)
  •
   ketoacidosis and lactic acidosis (E11.1-)
E11.1 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with acidosis
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     presence of cerebral edema (G93.6)
175
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E11.10o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis
       Includes:
      Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      (ketotic) hyperglycemia
     •
      ketoacidosis (DKA)
     •
      ketone formation with acidosis
     Excludes:
    that with lactic acidosis (E11.12)
E11.11o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with lactic acidosis
       Excludes:
      that with ketoacidosis (E11.12)
E11.12o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis with lactic acidosis
E11.2 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with kidney complications
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     type 2 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E11.64)
E11.20†o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with incipient diabetic nephropathy (N08.3-*)
          Includes:
         Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         conditions classified in N18.1 - N18.2 (N08.31* - N08.32*)
        •
         glomerular basement-membrane thickening
        •
         glomerular mesangial expansion
        •
         incipient nephropathy (early) (mild) (reversible)
        •
         microalbuminuria (constant) (persistent)
E11.23†o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with established or advanced kidney disease (N08.3-*)
          Includes:
         Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         chronic kidney (renal):
        •
         failure
        •
         impairment
        •
         conditions classified in N18.3 - N18.5 (N08.33* - N08.35*)
        •
         end-stage kidney disease (ESKD)
        •
         established diabetic nephropathy
        •
         glomerulosclerosis (diffuse) (intracapillary) (nodular)
        •
         Kimmelstiel-Wilson (disease) (lesion)
        •
         macroalbuminuria
        •
         nephropathy (advanced) (progressive) (NOS)
        •
         nephrosis
        •
         nephrotic syndrome
        •
         proteinuria (constant) (persistent)
E11.28o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with other specified kidney complication not elsewhere classified
       Includes:
      Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      Ebstein's disease (renal tubular degeneration in diabetes) † (N16.3*)
       •
        glomerulonephritis † (N08.38*)
         •
          pyelonephritis † (N08.38*)
           Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
          •
           acute renal failure with medullary (papillary) necrosis (N17.2)
          •
           acute renal failure, unspecified (N17.9)
          •
           postprocedural renal failure (N99.0)
E11.3 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with ophthalmic complications
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     type 2 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E11.64)
E11.30†o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with background retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         nonproliferative retinopathy
        •
         retinal dot-and-blot hemorrhages, hard exudates, microaneurysms
        •
         retinopathy NOS
        Excludes:
       type 2 diabetes mellitus with maculopathy (E11.33)
E11.31†o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with preproliferative retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Type 2 diabetes mellitus with intraretinal microvascular abnormalities [IRMA]:
        •
         cotton-wool spots
        •
         hemorrhages (blotchy) (round) (small)
        •
         ischemia
        •
         venous beading, looping, reduplication
E11.10o
176
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E11.32†o
Type 2 diabetes mellitus with proliferative retinopathy (H36.0*)
Includes:
Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
•
preretinal hemorrhage
•
retinal neovascularization (new vessel formation)
E11.33†o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with other retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         advanced retinopathy
        •
         macular - degeneration, edema (focal) (generalized) (intraretinal), star
        •
         maculopathy (circinate) (ischemic)
        •
         retinal thickening
        Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
       •
        retinal detachment with retinal traction (H33.4)
       •
        vitreous hemorrhage (H43.1)
       Excludes:
      postprocedural vitreous hemorrhage (H59.0)
E11.36o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with advanced ophthalmic disease
       Includes:
      Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      glaucoma (neovascular) † (H42.0*)
       •
        ischemic optic neuropathy † (H36.0*)
         •
          retinal artery occlusion † (H36.0*)
           •
            retinal vein occlusion † (H36.0*)
E11.38o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with other specified ophthalmic complication not elsewhere
       classified
      Includes:
     Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
    •
     iritis (iridocyclitis) † (H22.1*)
      •
       retinitis † (H36.0*)
        Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
       •
        keratopathy (H18.9)
       •
        senile [age-related] cataract (H25.-)
E11.4† Type 2 diabetes mellitus with neurological complications
        Use additional code to identify any:
       •
        type 2 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E11.64)
E11.40†o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with mononeuropathy
          Includes:
         Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         amyotrophy (G73.0*)
        •
         carpal tunnel syndrome (G59.0*)
        •
         cranial nerve palsy - III (oculomotor), VI (abducens) (G59.0*)
        •
         femoral neuropathy (G59.0*)
        •
         mononeuritis multiplex (G59.0*)
        •
         mononeuropathy (G59.0*)
        •
         myasthenia gravis (G73.0*)
        •
         myasthenic syndromes (G73.0*)
        •
         ophthalmoplegia (G59.0*)
        •
         radiculopathy - thoracic, truncal (G59.0*)
        •
         ulnar nerve compression or entrapment (G59.0*)
        Excludes:
       type 2 diabetes mellitus with autonomic (mono)neuropathy (E11.42)
E11.41†o 
E11.41†o
Type 2 diabetes mellitus with polyneuropathy (G63.2*)
Includes:
Type 2 Diabetes mellitus with:
•
 insulin neuritis
•
 neuropathic cachexia
•
 neuropathy NOS
•
 peripheral neuropathy (distal symmetrical) (selective small fibre) (sensorimotor) (NOS)
Excludes:
type 2 diabetes mellitus with autonomic (poly)neuropathy (E11.42)
177
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E11.42†o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with autonomic neuropathy (G99.0*)
          Includes:
         Type 2 Diabetes mellitus with autonomic mononeuropathy/polyneuropathy:
        •
         abnormal sweating (gustatory)
        •
         anorectal dysfunction
        •
         diarrhea (functional)
        •
         erectile failure (impotence)
        •
         gastroparesis
        •
         hypotonic bladder
        •
         neuropathic edema
        •
         oesophageal dysfunction
        •
         postural hypotension
E11.5 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with circulatory complications
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     type 2 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E11.64)
E11.50†o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with peripheral angiopathy (I79.2*)
          Includes:
         Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         intermittent claudication
        •
         peripheral vascular disease, unspecified (PVD)
        •
         spasm of artery
        Excludes:
       type 2 diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (E11.70)
E11.51†o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with peripheral angiopathy with gangrene (I79.2*)
          Code separately any gas gangrene (A48.0)
         Excludes:
        type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
       •
        foot ulcer with gangrene (E11.71)
       •
        Fournier's gangrene (E11.68)
       •
        Meleney's gangrene (E11.68)
       •
        ulcer (on ankle or any part of lower limb, except foot) (E11.68)
E11.52o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with certain circulatory complications
       Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
      •
       acute ischaemic heart disease (I24.-)
      •
       angina (I20.-)
      •
       cardiomyopathy (I42.9)
      •
       cerebrovascular diseases (I60-169)
      •
       chronic ischaemic heart disease (I25.-)
      •
       heart failure (I50.-)
      •
       multiinfarct dementia (F01.1)
      •
       transient cerebral ischaemic attack (TIA) (G45.9)
E11.6 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with other specified complications
E11.60o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with musculoskeletal and connective tissue complication
       Includes:
      Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      bone change † (M90.8*)
       •
        diabetic arthropathy (cheiroarthropathy) (osteoarthropathy) † (M14.2*)
         •
          diabetic hand syndrome † (M14.2*)
           •
            diabetic neuropathic (Charcot's) arthropathy † (M14.6*)
             •
              Dupuytren's contracture † (M73.8*)
               •
                osteoporosis † (M82.1*)
                 •
                  periarthritis of shoulder [frozen shoulder] † (M14.2*)
                   Code separately any osteoporosis with pathological fracture (M80.8-)
                  Use additional code to identify any:
                 •
                  type 2 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E11.64)
E11.61o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with skin and subcutaneous tissue complication
       Includes:
      Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      bullosis diabeticorum (diabetic bullae) † (L14*)
       •
        diabetic dermopathy † (L99.8*)
         •
          diabetic periungual telangiectasia † (L62.8*)
           •
            necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum (NLD) † (L99.8*)
             •
              scleroderma (systemic) † (M36.8*)
               Use additional code to identify any:
              •
               type 2 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E11.64)
E11.42†
178
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E11.62o
Type 2 diabetes mellitus with periodontal complication
Includes:
Type 2 diabetes mellitus with:
•
periodontal abscess
•
periodontal disease NOS
•
periodontitis (acute) (chronic)
Use additional code to identify any:
•
type 2 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E11.64)
E11.63o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with hypoglycaemia
       Code separately any associated type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic coma (E11.0)
E11.64o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described
       Includes:
      Type 2 diabetes mellitus:
     •
      for stabilization
     •
      uncontrolled
     •
      unstable
     •
      with secondary treatment failure
     Excludes:
    type 2 diabetes mellitus with poor control (hyperglycemia) with:
   •
    acidosis (E11.1-)
   •
    coma (E11.0)
E11.68o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with other specified complication, not elsewhere classified
       Use additional code to identify any:
      •
       type 2 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E11.64)
      Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
     •
      Fournier's gangrene (acute dermal) (bacterial) (haemolytic)
     •
      female ( N76.88)
     •
      male ( N49.3)
     •
      decubitus ulcer (not foot) (L89 .-)
     •
      fibrous breast disease (mastopathy) sclerosing lymphocytic lobulitis (N61 )
     •
      Meleney's gangrene (progressive bacterial synergistic) (L98.4 )
     •
      necrotizing fasciitis (M72.6- )
     •
      skin ulcer (chronic) (NOS) (L98.4 )
     •
      skin ulcer of lower limb (not foot) (L97 )
     Excludes:
    type 2 diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (E11.70)
E11.7 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with multiple complications
     Includes:
    Diabetic foot
   Use additional code to identify any:
  •
   type 2 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E11.64)
E11.70o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (angiopathic)(neuropathic)
       Excludes:
      type 2 diabetes mellitus with lower limb ulcer not involving foot (E11.68)
E11.71o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (angiopathic) (neuropathic) with gangrene
       Excludes:
      type 2 diabetes mellitus with gangrenous lower limb ulcer not involving foot (E11.51)
E11.78o Type 2 diabetes mellitus with multiple other complications
       Includes:
      Type 2 diabetes mellitus with multiple (unspecified) complications
E11.9 
E11.9
Type 2 diabetes mellitus without (mention of) complications
Includes:
Non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) NOS
Non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus of the young (NIDDMY) NOS
Type 2 diabetes mellitus NOS
Use additional code to identify any:
•
 type 2 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E11.64)
179
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E13
Other specified diabetes mellitus
Includes:
E13
Excludes:
Diabetic mellitus due to genetic defects (in) (of) beta-cell function, insulin action
Maturity onset diabetes of the young [MODY]
diabetes mellitus (in):
•
NOS (E14.-)
•
neonatal (P70.2)
•
pregnancy (gestational), childbirth and the puerperium (O24.-)
•
renal glycosuria (E74.8)
•
type 1 (E10.-)
•
type 2 (E11.-)
impaired carbohydrate tolerance (pre-diabetes) (R73.0)
non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus of the young (NIDDMY) (E11.-)
postprocedural hypoinsulinaemia of the non-diabetic (E89.1)
E13.0 Other specified diabetes mellitus with coma
     Includes:
    Other specified diabetic coma (ketotic) (non-ketotic) (hyperosmolar) (hyperglycaemic)
   (hypoglycaemic)
  Use additional code to identify any:
 •
  hyperosmolality [hyperosmolarity] and hypernatraemia (E87.0)
 •
  hypoglycemia (E13.63)
 •
  ketoacidosis and lactic acidosis (E13.1-)
E13.1 Other specified diabetes mellitus with acidosis
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     presence of cerebral edema (G93.6)
E13.10o Other specified diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis
       Includes:
      Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      (ketotic) hyperglycemia
     •
      ketoacidosis (DKA)
     •
      ketone formation with acidosis
     Excludes:
    that with lactic acidosis (E13.12)
E13.11o Other specified diabetes mellitus with lactic acidosis
       Excludes:
      that with ketoacidosis (E13.12)
E13.12o Other specified diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis with lactic acidosis
E13.2 Other specified diabetes mellitus with kidney complications
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     other specified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E13.64)
E13.20†o Other specified diabetes mellitus with incipient diabetic nephropathy (N08.3-*)
          Includes:
         Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         conditions classified in N18.1 - N18.2 (N08.31* - N08.32*)
        •
         glomerular basement-membrane thickening
        •
         glomerular mesangial expansion
        •
         incipient nephropathy (early) (mild) (reversible)
        •
         microalbuminuria (constant) (persistent)
E13.23†o Other specified diabetes mellitus with established or advanced kidney disease (N08.3-*)
          Includes:
         Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         chronic kidney (renal):
        •
         failure
        •
         impairment
        •
         conditions classified in N18.3 - N18.5 (N08.33* - N08.35*)
        •
         end-stage kidney disease (ESKD)
        •
         established diabetic nephropathy
        •
         glomerulosclerosis (diffuse) (intracapillary) (nodular)
        •
         Kimmelstiel-Wilson (disease) (lesion)
        •
         macroalbuminuria
        •
         nephropathy (advanced) (progressive) (NOS)
        •
         nephrosis
        •
         nephrotic syndrome
        •
         proteinuria (constant) (persistent)
180
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E13.28o
Other specified diabetes mellitus with other specified kidney complication not elsewhere
classified
Includes:
Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
•
Ebstein's disease (renal tubular degeneration in diabetes) † (N16.3*)
•
glomerulonephritis † (N08.38*)
•
pyelonephritis † (N08.38*)
Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
•
acute renal failure with medullary (papillary) necrosis (N17.2)
•
acute renal failure, unspecified (N17.9)
•
postprocedural renal failure (N99.0)
E13.3 Other specified diabetes mellitus with ophthalmic complications
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     other specified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E13.64)
E13.30†o Other specified diabetes mellitus with background retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         nonproliferative retinopathy
        •
         retinal dot-and-blot hemorrhages, hard exudates, microaneurysms
        •
         retinopathy NOS
        Excludes:
       other specified diabetes mellitus with maculopathy (E13.33)
E13.31†o Other specified diabetes mellitus with preproliferative retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Other specified diabetes mellitus with intraretinal microvascular abnormalities [IRMA]:
        •
         cotton-wool spots
        •
         hemorrhages (blotchy) (round) (small)
        •
         ischemia
        •
         venous beading, looping, reduplication
E13.32†o Other specified diabetes mellitus with proliferative retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         preretinal hemorrhage
        •
         retinal neovascularization (new vessel formation)
E13.33†o Other specified diabetes mellitus with other retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         advanced retinopathy
        •
         macular - degeneration, edema (focal) (generalized) (intraretinal), star
        •
         maculopathy (circinate) (ischemic)
        •
         retinal thickening
        Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
       •
        retinal detachment with retinal traction (H33.4)
       •
        vitreous hemorrhage (H43.1)
       Excludes:
      postprocedural vitreous hemorrhage (H59.0)
E13.36o Other specified diabetes mellitus with advanced ophthalmic disease
       Includes:
      Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      glaucoma (neovascular) † (H42.0*)
       •
        ischemic optic neuropathy † (H36.0*)
         •
          retinal artery occlusion † (H36.0*)
           •
            retinal vein occlusion † (H36.0*)
E13.38o Other specified diabetes mellitus with other specified ophthalmic complication not elsewhere
       classified
      Includes:
     Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
    •
     iritis (iridocyclitis) † (H22.1*)
      •
       retinitis † (H36.0*)
        Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
       •
        keratopathy (H18.9)
       •
        senile [age-related] cataract (H25.-)
E13.4† 
E13.4†
Other specified diabetes mellitus with neurological complications
Use additional code to identify any:
•
 other specified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E13.64)
181
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E13.40†o Other specified diabetes mellitus with mononeuropathy
          Includes:
         Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         amyotrophy (G73.0*)
        •
         carpal tunnel syndrome (G59.0*)
        •
         cranial nerve palsy - III (oculomotor), VI (abducens) (G59.0*)
        •
         femoral neuropathy (G59.0*)
        •
         mononeuritis multiplex (G59.0*)
        •
         mononeuropathy (G59.0*)
        •
         myasthenia gravis (G73.0*)
        •
         myasthenic syndromes (G73.0*)
        •
         ophthalmoplegia (G59.0*)
        •
         radiculopathy - thoracic, truncal (G59.0*)
        •
         ulnar nerve compression or entrapment (G59.0*)
        Excludes:
       other specified diabetes mellitus with autonomic (mono)neuropathy (E13.42)
E13.41†o Other specified diabetes mellitus with polyneuropathy (G63.2*)
          Includes:
         Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         insulin neuritis
        •
         neuropathic cachexia
        •
         neuropathy NOS
        •
         peripheral neuropathy (distal symmetrical) (selective small fibre) (sensorimotor) (NOS)
        Excludes:
       other specified diabetes mellitus with autonomic (poly)neuropathy (E13.42)
E13.42†o Other specified diabetes mellitus with autonomic neuropathy (G99.0*)
          Includes:
         Other specified diabetes mellitus with autonomic mononeuropathy/polyneuropathy:
        •
         abnormal sweating (gustatory)
        •
         anorectal dysfunction
        •
         diarrhea (functional)
        •
         erectile failure (impotence)
        •
         gastroparesis
        •
         hypotonic bladder
        •
         neuropathic edema
        •
         oesophageal dysfunction
        •
         postural hypotension
E13.5 Other specified diabetes mellitus with circulatory complications
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     other specified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E13.64)
E13.50†o Other specified diabetes mellitus with peripheral angiopathy (I79.2*)
          Includes:
         Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         intermittent claudication
        •
         peripheral vascular disease, unspecified (PVD)
        •
         spasm of artery
        Excludes:
       other specified diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (E13.70)
E13.51†o Other specified diabetes mellitus with peripheral angiopathy with gangrene (I79.2*)
          Code separately any gas gangrene (A48.0)
         Excludes:
        other specified diabetes mellitus with:
       •
        foot ulcer with gangrene (E13.71)
       •
        Fournier's gangrene (E13.68)
       •
        Meleney's gangrene (E13.68)
       •
        ulcer (on ankle or any part of lower limb, except foot) (E13.68)
E13.52o Other specified diabetes mellitus with certain circulatory complications
       Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
      •
       acute ischaemic heart disease (I24.-)
      •
       angina (I20.-)
      •
       cardiomyopathy (I42.9)
      •
       cerebrovascular diseases (I60-169)
      •
       chronic ischaemic heart disease (I25.-)
      •
       heart failure (I50.-)
      •
       multiinfarct dementia (F01.1)
      •
       myocardial infarction (I21-I22)
      •
       transient cerebral ischaemic attack (TIA) (G45.9)
E13.40†
182
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E13.6 Other specified diabetes mellitus with other specified complications
E13.60o Other specified diabetes mellitus with musculoskeletal and connective tissue complication
       Includes:
      Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      bone change † (M90.8*)
       •
        diabetic arthropathy (cheiroarthropathy) (osteoarthropathy) † (M14.2*)
         •
          diabetic hand syndrome † (M14.2*)
           •
            diabetic neuropathic (Charcot's) arthropathy † (M14.6*)
             •
              Dupuytren's contracture † (M73.8*)
               •
                osteoporosis † (M82.1*)
                 •
                  periarthritis of shoulder [frozen shoulder] † (M14.2*)
                   Code separately any osteoporosis with pathological fracture (M80.8-)
                  Use additional code to identify any:
                 •
                  other specified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E13.64)
E13.61o Other specified diabetes mellitus with skin and subcutaneous tissue complication
       Includes:
      Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      bullosis diabeticorum (diabetic bullae) † (L14*)
       •
        diabetic dermopathy † (L99.8*)
         •
          diabetic periungual telangiectasia † (L62.8*)
           •
            necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum (NLD) † (L99.8*)
             •
              scleroderma (systemic) † (M36.8*)
               Use additional code to identify any:
              •
               other specified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E13.64)
E13.62o Other specified diabetes mellitus with periodontal complication
       Includes:
      Other specified diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      periodontal abscess
     •
      periodontal disease NOS
     •
      periodontitis (acute) (chronic)
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     other specified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E13.64)
E13.63o Other specified diabetes mellitus with hypoglycaemia
       Code separately any associated other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic coma (E13.0)
E13.64o Other specified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described
       Includes:
      Other specified diabetes mellitus:
     •
      for stabilization
     •
      uncontrolled
     •
      unstable
     •
      with secondary treatment failure
     Excludes:
    other specified diabetes mellitus with poor control (hyperglycemia) with:
   •
    acidosis (E13.1-)
   •
    coma (E13.0)
E13.68o Other specified diabetes mellitus with other specified complication, not elsewhere classified
       Use additional code to identify any:
      •
       other specified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E13.64)
      Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
     •
      Fournier's gangrene (acute dermal) (bacterial) (haemolytic)
     •
      female ( N76.88)
     •
      male ( N49.3)
     •
      decubitus ulcer (not foot) (L89 .-)
     •
      fibrous breast disease (mastopathy) sclerosing lymphocytic lobulitis (N61 )
     •
      Meleney's gangrene (progressive bacterial synergistic) (L98.4 )
     •
      necrotizing fasciitis (M72.6- )
     •
      skin ulcer (chronic) (NOS) (L98.4 )
     •
      skin ulcer of lower limb (not foot) (L97 )
     Excludes:
    other specified diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (E13.70)
E13.7 Other specified diabetes mellitus with multiple complications
     Includes:
    Diabetic foot
   Use additional code to identify any:
  •
   other specified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E13.64)
E13.7
183
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E13.70o 
E13.70o
Other specified diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (angiopathic) (neuropathic)
Excludes:
other specified diabetes mellitus with lower limb ulcer not involving foot (E13.68)
E13.71o Other specified diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (angiopathic) (neuropathic) with gangrene
       Excludes:
      other specified diabetes mellitus with gangrenous lower limb ulcer not involving foot (E13.51)
E13.78o Other specified diabetes mellitus with multiple other complications
       Includes:
      Other specified diabetes mellitus with multiple (unspecified) complications
E13.9 Other specified diabetes mellitus without (mention of) complication
     Includes:
    Diabetes mellitus due to genetic defects (in) (of) beta-cell function, insulin action NOS
   Maturity onset diabetes mellitus of the young [MODY] NOS
  Other specified diabetes mellitus without (mention of) complication NOS
 Use additional code to identify any:
•
 other specified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E13.64)
E14
Unspecified diabetes mellitus
Includes:
Excludes:
Diabetes mellitus NOS
diabetes mellitus (in)
•
neonatal (P70.2)
•
pregnancy (gestational), childbirth and the puerperium (O24.-)
•
renal glycosuria (E74.8)
•
type 1 (E10.-)
•
type 2 (E11.-)
due to genetic defects (in)(of) beta cell function, insulin action (E13.-)
impaired carbohydrate tolerance (pre-diabetes) (R73.0)
maturity onset diabetes mellitus of the young [MODY] (E13)
non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus of the young [NIDDMY] (E11.-)
post-procedural hypoinsulinaemia of the non-diabetic (E89.1)
E14.0 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with coma
     Includes:
    Diabetic coma (ketotic) (non-ketotic) (hyperosmolar) (hyperglycaemic) (hypoglycaemic)
   Use additional code to identify any:
  •
   hyperosmolality [hyperosmolarity] and hypernatraemia (E87.0)
  •
   hypoglycemia (E14.63)
  •
   ketoacidosis and lactic acidosis (E14.1-)
E14.1 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with acidosis
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     presence of cerebral edema (G93.6)
E14.10o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis
       Includes:
      Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      (ketotic) hyperglycemia
     •
      ketoacidosis (DKA)
     •
      ketone formation with acidosis
     Excludes:
    that with lactic acidosis (E14.12)
E14.11o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with lactic acidosis
       Excludes:
      that with ketoacidosis (E14.12)
E14.12o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis with lactic acidosis
E14.2 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with kidney complications
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     unspecified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E14.64)
E14.20†o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with incipient diabetic nephropathy (N08.3-*)
          Includes:
         Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         conditions classified in N18.1 - N18.2 (N08.31* - N08.32*)
        •
         glomerular basement-membrane thickening
        •
         glomerular mesangial expansion
        •
         incipient nephropathy (early) (mild) (reversible)
        •
         microalbuminuria (constant) (persistent)
184
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E14.23†o
Unspecified diabetes mellitus with established or advanced kidney disease (N08.3-*)
Includes:
Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
•
chronic kidney (renal):
•
failure
•
impairment
•
conditions classified in N18.3 - N18.5 (N08.33* - N08.35*)
•
end-stage kidney disease (ESKD)
•
established diabetic nephropathy
•
glomerulosclerosis (diffuse) (intracapillary) (nodular)
•
Kimmelstiel-Wilson (disease) (lesion)
•
macroalbuminuria
•
nephropathy (advanced) (progressive) (NOS)
•
nephrosis
•
nephrotic syndrome
•
proteinuria (constant) (persistent)
E14.28o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with other specified kidney complication not elsewhere
       classified
      Includes:
     Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
    •
     Ebstein's disease (renal tubular degeneration in diabetes) † (N16.3*)
      •
       glomerulonephritis †(N08.38*)
        •
         pyelonephritis † (N08.38*)
          Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
         •
          acute renal failure with medullary (papillary) necrosis (N17.2)
         •
          acute renal failure, unspecified (N17.9)
         •
          postprocedural renal failure (N99.0)
E14.3 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with ophthalmic complications
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     unspecified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E14.64)
E14.30†o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with background retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         nonproliferative retinopathy
        •
         retinal dot-and-blot hemorrhages, hard exudates, microaneurysms
        •
         retinopathy NOS
        Excludes:
       unspecified diabetes mellitus with maculopathy (E14.33)
E14.31†o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with preproliferative retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Unspecified diabetes mellitus with intraretinal microvascular abnormalities [IRMA]:
        •
         cotton-wool spots
        •
         hemorrhages (blotchy) (round) (small)
        •
         ischemia
        •
         venous beading, looping, reduplication
E14.32†o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with proliferative retinopathy (H36.0*)
          Includes:
         Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         preretinal hemorrhage
        •
         retinal neovascularization (new vessel formation)
E14.33†o 
E14.33†o
Unspecified diabetes mellitus with other retinopathy (H36.0*)
Includes:
Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
•
 advanced retinopathy
•
 macular - degeneration, edema (focal) (generalized) (intraretinal), star
•
 maculopathy (circinate) (ischemic)
•
 retinal thickening
Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
•
 retinal detachment with retinal traction (H33.4)
•
 vitreous hemorrhage (H43.1)
Excludes:
postprocedural vitreous hemorrhage (H59.0)
185
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E14.36o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with advanced ophthalmic disease
       Includes:
      Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      glaucoma (neovascular) † (H42.0*)
       •
        ischemic optic neuropathy † (H36.0*)
         •
          retinal artery occlusion † (H36.0*)
           •
            retinal vein occlusion † (H36.0*)
E14.38o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with other specified ophthalmic complication not elsewhere
       classified
      Includes:
     Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
    •
     iritis (iridocyclitis) † (H22.1*)
      •
       retinitis † (H36.0*)
        Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
       •
        keratopathy (H18.9)
       •
        senile [age-related] cataract (H25.-)
E14.4† Unspecified diabetes mellitus with neurological complications
        Use additional code to identify any:
       •
        unspecified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E14.64)
E14.40†o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with mononeuropathy
          Includes:
         Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         amyotrophy (G73.0*)
        •
         carpal tunnel syndrome (G59.0*)
        •
         cranial nerve palsy - III (oculomotor), VI (abducens) (G59.0*)
        •
         femoral neuropathy (G59.0*)
        •
         mononeuritis multiplex (G59.0*)
        •
         mononeuropathy (G59.0*)
        •
         myasthenia gravis (G73.0*)
        •
         myasthenic syndromes (G73.0*)
        •
         ophthalmoplegia (G59.0*)
        •
         radiculopathy - thoracic, truncal (G59.0*)
        •
         ulnar nerve compression or entrapment (G59.0*)
        Excludes:
       unspecified diabetes mellitus with autonomic (mono)neuropathy (E14.42)
E14.41†o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with polyneuropathy (G63.2*)
          Includes:
         Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         insulin neuritis
        •
         neuropathic cachexia
        •
         neuropathy NOS
        •
         peripheral neuropathy (distal symmetrical) (selective small fibre) (sensorimotor) (NOS)
        Excludes:
       unspecified diabetes mellitus with autonomic (poly)neuropathy (E14.42)
E14.42†o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with autonomic neuropathy (G99.0*)
          Includes:
         Unspecified diabetes mellitus with autonomic mononeuropathy/polyneuropathy:
        •
         abnormal sweating (gustatory)
        •
         anorectal dysfunction
        •
         diarrhea (functional)
        •
         erectile failure (impotence)
        •
         gastroparesis
        •
         hypotonic bladder
        •
         neuropathic edema
        •
         oesophageal dysfunction
        •
         postural hypotension
E14.5 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with circulatory complications
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     unspecified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E14.64)
E14.50†o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with peripheral angiopathy (I79.2*)
          Includes:
         Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
        •
         intermittent claudication
        •
         peripheral vascular disease, unspecified (PVD)
        •
         spasm of artery
        Excludes:
       unspecified diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (E14.70)
E14.36o
186
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E14.51†o
Unspecified diabetes mellitus with peripheral angiopathy with gangrene (I79.2*)
Code separately any gas gangrene (A48.0)
Excludes:
unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
•
foot ulcer with gangrene (E14.71)
•
Fournier's gangrene (E14.68)
•
Meleney's gangrene (E14.68)
•
ulcer (on ankle or any part of lower limb, except foot) (E14.68)
E14.52o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with certain circulatory complications
       Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
      •
       acute ischaemic heart disease (I24.-)
      •
       angina (I20.-)
      •
       cardiomyopathy (I42.9)
      •
       cerebrovascular diseases (I60-169)
      •
       chronic ischaemic heart disease (I25.-)
      •
       heart failure (I50.-)
      •
       multiinfarct dementia (F01.1)
      •
       myocardial infarction (I21-I22)
      •
       transient cerebral ischaemic attack (TIA) (G45.9)
E14.6 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with other specified complications
E14.60o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with musculoskeletal and connective tissue complication
       Includes:
      Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      bone change † (M90.8*)
       •
        diabetic arthropathy (osteoarthropathy) (cheirarthropathy) † (M14.2*)
         •
          diabetic hand syndrome † (M14.2*)
           •
            diabetic neuropathic (Charcot's) arthropathy † (M14.6*)
             •
              Dupuytren's contracture † (M73.8*)
               •
                osteoporosis † (M82.1*)
                 •
                  periarthritis of shoulder [frozen shoulder] † (M14.2*)
                   Code separately any osteoporosis with pathological fracture (M80.8-)
                  Use additional code to identify any:
                 •
                  unspecified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E14.64)
E14.61o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with skin and subcutaneous tissue complication
       Includes:
      Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      bullosis diabeticorum (diabetic bullae) † (L14*)
       •
        diabetic dermopathy † (L99.8*)
         •
          diabetic periungual telangiectasia † (L62.8*)
           •
            necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum (NLD) † (L99.8*)
             •
              scleroderma (systemic) † (M36.8*)
               Use additional code to identify any:
              •
               unspecified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E14.64)
E14.62o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with periodontal complication
       Includes:
      Unspecified diabetes mellitus with:
     •
      periodontal abscess
     •
      periodontal disease NOS
     •
      periodontitis (acute) (chronic)
     Use additional code to identify any:
    •
     unspecified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E14.64)
E14.63o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with hypoglycaemia
       Code separately any associated unspecified diabetes mellitus with diabetic coma (E14.0)
E14.64o 
E14.64o
Unspecified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described
Includes:
Unspecified diabetes mellitus:
•
 for stabilization
•
 uncontrolled
•
 unstable
•
 with secondary treatment failure
Excludes:
Unspecified diabetes mellitus with poor control (hyperglycemia) with:
•
 acidosis (E14.1-)
•
 coma (E14.0)
187
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E14.68o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with other specified complication, not elsewhere classified
       Use additional code to identify any:
      •
       unspecified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E14.64)
      Code separately any of the following associated conditions:
     •
      Fournier's gangrene (acute dermal) (bacterial) (haemolytic)
     •
      female ( N76.88)
     •
      male ( N49.3)
     •
      decubitus ulcer (not foot) (L89 .-)
     •
      fibrous breast disease (mastopathy) sclerosing lymphocytic lobulitis (N61 )
     •
      Meleney's gangrene (progressive bacterial synergistic) (L98.4 )
     •
      necrotizing fasciitis (M72.6- )
     •
      skin ulcer (chronic) (NOS) (L98.4 )
     •
      skin ulcer of lower limb (not foot) (L97 )
     Excludes:
    unspecified diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer ( E14.70)
E14.7 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with multiple complications
     Includes:
    Diabetic foot
   Use additional code to identify any:
  •
   unspecified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E14.64)
E14.70o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (angiopathic) (neuropathic)
       Excludes:
      unspecified diabetes mellitus with lower limb ulcer not involving foot (E14.68)
E14.71o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with foot ulcer (angiopathic) (neuropathic) with gangrene
       Excludes:
      unspecified diabetes mellitus with gangrenous lower limb ulcer not involving foot (E14.51)
E14.78o Unspecified diabetes mellitus with multiple other complications
       Includes:
      Unspecified diabetes mellitus with multiple (unspecified) complications
E14.9 Unspecified diabetes mellitus without (mention of) complication
     Includes:
    Diabetes mellitus NOS
   Use additional code to identify any:
  •
   unspecified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E14.64)
E14.68o
188
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
Other disorders of glucose regulation and pancreatic internal
secretion
(E15-E16)
E15
E16.9
Nondiabetic hypoglycaemic coma
Includes:
Drug-induced insulin coma in nondiabetic
Hyperinsulinism with hypoglycaemic coma
Hypoglycaemic coma NOS
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
E16
Other disorders of pancreatic internal secretion
E16.0 Drug-induced hypoglycaemia without coma
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
E16.1 Other hypoglycaemia
     Includes:
    Functional nonhyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia
   Hyperinsulinism:
  •
   NOS
  •
   functional
  Hyperplasia of pancreatic islet beta cells NOS
 Posthypoglycaemic coma encephalopathy
E16.2 Hypoglycaemia, unspecified
E16.3 Increased secretion of glucagon
     Includes:
    Hyperplasia of pancreatic endocrine cells with glucagon excess
E16.4 Abnormal secretion of gastrin
     Includes:
    Hypergastrinaemia
   Zollinger Ellison syndrome
E16.8 Other specified disorders of pancreatic internal secretion
     Includes:
    Increased secretion from endocrine pancreas of:
   •
    growth hormone-releasing hormone
   •
    pancreatic polypeptide
   •
    somatostatin
   •
    vasoactive-intestinal polypeptide
E16.9 Disorder of pancreatic internal secretion, unspecified
     Includes:
    Islet-cell hyperplasia NOS
   Pancreatic endocrine cell hyperplasia NOS
189
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E20
Disorders of other endocrine glands
(E20-E35)
Excludes:
E20
galactorrhoea (N64.3)
gynaecomastia (N62)
Hypoparathyroidism
Excludes:
Di George's syndrome (D82.1)
postprocedural hypoparathyroidism (E89.2)
tetany NOS (R29.0 )
transitory neonatal hypoparathyroidism (P71.4)
E20.0 Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism
     Excludes:
    that with known cause (E20.8)
E20.1 Pseudohypoparathyroidism
E20.8 Other hypoparathyroidism
     Use additional code to identify underlying cause
E20.9 Hypoparathyroidism, unspecified
     Includes:
    Parathyroid tetany
E21
Hyperparathyroidism and other disorders of parathyroid gland
Excludes:
osteomalacia:
•
adult (M83.-)
•
infantile and juvenile (E55.0)
E21.0 Primary hyperparathyroidism
     Includes:
    Hyperplasia of parathyroid
   Osteitis fibrosa cystica generalisata [von Recklinghausen's disease of bone]
E21.1 Secondary hyperparathyroidism, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    secondary hyperparathyroidism of renal origin (N25.8)
E21.2 Other hyperparathyroidism
     Excludes:
    familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia (E83.5)
E21.3 Hyperparathyroidism, unspecified
E21.4 Other specified disorders of parathyroid gland
E21.5 Disorder of parathyroid gland, unspecified
E22
Hyperfunction of pituitary gland
Excludes:
Cushing's syndrome (E24.-)
Nelson's syndrome (E24.1)
overproduction of:
•
ACTH not associated with Cushing's disease (E27.0)
•
pituitary ACTH (E24.0)
•
thyroid-stimulating hormone (E05.8)
E22.0 Acromegaly and pituitary gigantism
     Includes:
    Arthropathy associated with acromegaly† (M14.5*)
     Overproduction of growth hormone
    Excludes:
   constitutional:
  •
   gigantism (E34.4)
  •
   tall stature (E34.4)
  increased secretion from endocrine pancreas of growth hormone-releasing hormone (E16.8)
E22.1 Hyperprolactinaemia
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
E22.2 Syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone
190
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E22.8 Other hyperfunction of pituitary gland
     Includes:
    Central precocious puberty
E22.9 Hyperfunction of pituitary gland, unspecified
     Includes:
    Prolactinemia not due to a tumor
E23
E24.9
Hypofunction and other disorders of pituitary gland
Includes:
Excludes:
the listed conditions whether the disorder is in the pituitary or the hypothalamus
postprocedural hypopituitarism (E89.3)
E23.0 Hypopituitarism
     Includes:
    Fertile eunuch syndrome
   Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
  Idiopathic growth hormone deficiency
 Isolated deficiency of:
•
 gonadotropin
•
 growth hormone
•
 pituitary hormone
Kallmann's syndrome
Lorain-Levi short stature
Necrosis of pituitary gland (postpartum)
Panhypopituitarism
Pituitary:
•
 cachexia
•
 insufficiency NOS
•
 short stature
Sheehan's syndrome
Simmonds' disease
E23.1 Drug-induced hypopituitarism
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
E23.2 Diabetes insipidus
     Excludes:
    nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (N25.1)
E23.3 Hypothalamic dysfunction, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    Prader-Willi syndrome (Q87.1)
   Russell-Silver syndrome (Q87.1)
E23.6 Other disorders of pituitary gland
     Includes:
    Abscess of pituitary
   Adiposogenital dystrophy
E23.7 Disorder of pituitary gland, unspecified
E24
Cushing's syndrome
E24.0 Pituitary-dependent Cushing's disease
     Includes:
    Overproduction of pituitary ACTH
   Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
E24.1 Nelson's syndrome
E24.2 Drug-induced Cushing's syndrome
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
E24.3 Ectopic ACTH syndrome
E24.4 Alcohol-induced pseudo-Cushing's syndrome
E24.8 Other Cushing's syndrome
E24.9 Cushing's syndrome, unspecified
191
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E25
Adrenogenital disorders
Includes:
E25
adrenogenital syndromes, virilizing or feminizing, whether acquired or due to adrenal
hyperplasia consequent on inborn enzyme defects in hormone synthesis
female:
•
adrenal pseudohermaphroditism
•
heterosexual precocious pseudopuberty
male:
•
isosexual precocious pseudopuberty
•
macrogenitosomia praecox
•
sexual precocity with adrenal hyperplasia
virilization (female)
E25.0 Congenital adrenogenital disorders associated with enzyme deficiency
     Includes:
    21-Hydroxylase deficiency
   Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
  Salt-losing congenital adrenal hyperplasia
E25.8 Other adrenogenital disorders
     Includes:
    Idiopathic adrenogenital disorder
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
E25.9 Adrenogenital disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Adrenogenital syndrome NOS
E26
Hyperaldosteronism
E26.0 Primary hyperaldosteronism
     Includes:
    Conn's syndrome
   Primary aldosteronism due to adrenal hyperplasia (bilateral)
E26.1 Secondary hyperaldosteronism
E26.8 Other hyperaldosteronism
     Includes:
    Bartter's syndrome
   Gitelman syndrome
E26.9 Hyperaldosteronism, unspecified
E27
Other disorders of adrenal gland
E27.0 Other adrenocortical overactivity
     Includes:
    Overproduction of ACTH, not associated with Cushing's disease
   Premature adrenarche
  Excludes:
 Cushing's syndrome (E24.-)
E27.1 Primary adrenocortical insufficiency
     Includes:
    Addison's disease
   Autoimmune adrenalitis
  Excludes:
 amyloidosis (E85.-)
tuberculous Addison's disease (A18.7)
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome (A39.1)
E27.2 Addisonian crisis
     Includes:
    Adrenal crisis
   Adrenocortical crisis
E27.3 Drug-induced adrenocortical insufficiency
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
192
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E27.4
Other and unspecified adrenocortical insufficiency
Includes:
Adrenal:
•
haemorrhage
•
infarction
Adrenocortical insufficiency NOS
Cortisol receptor deficit
Hypoaldosteronism
Excludes:
adrenoleukodystrophy [Addison-Schilder] (E71.3)
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome (A39.1)
E27.5 Adrenomedullary hyperfunction
     Includes:
    Adrenomedullary hyperplasia
   Catecholamine hypersecretion
E27.8 Other specified disorders of adrenal gland
     Includes:
    Abnormality of cortisol-binding globulin
   Excludes:
  adrenal disorder associated with Cushing's syndrome (E24.8)
E27.9 
E29.0
Disorder of adrenal gland, unspecified
E28
Ovarian dysfunction
Excludes:
isolated gonadotropin deficiency (E23.0)
postprocedural ovarian failure (E89.4)
E28.0 Estrogen excess
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
E28.1 Androgen excess
     Includes:
    Hypersecretion of ovarian androgens
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
E28.2 Polycystic ovarian syndrome
     Includes:
    Chronic hyperandrogenous anovulation syndrome
   Sclerocystic ovary syndrome
  Stein-Leventhal syndrome
E28.3 Primary ovarian failure
     Includes:
    Decreased estrogen
   Premature menopause NOS
  Resistant ovary syndrome
 Excludes:
menopausal and female climacteric states (N95.1)
pure gonadal dysgenesis (Q99.1)
Turner's syndrome (Q96.-)
E28.8 Other ovarian dysfunction
     Includes:
    Ovarian hyperfunction NOS
E28.9 Ovarian dysfunction, unspecified
E29
Testicular dysfunction
Excludes:
E29.0
androgen resistance syndrome (E34.5)
azoospermia or oligospermia NOS (N46)
isolated gonadotropin deficiency (E23.0)
Klinefelter's syndrome (Q98.0-Q98.2) (Q98.4)
postprocedural testicular hypofunction (E89.5)
testicular feminization (syndrome) (E34.5)
Testicular hyperfunction
Includes:
Hypersecretion of testicular hormones
193
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E29.1 Testicular hypofunction
     Includes:
    5-alpha-Reductase deficiency (with male pseudohermaphroditism)
   Defective biosynthesis of testicular androgen NOS
  Testicular hypogonadism NOS
 Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
E29.8 Other testicular dysfunction
E29.9 Testicular dysfunction, unspecified
E29.1
E30
Disorders of puberty, not elsewhere classified
E30.0 Delayed puberty
     Includes:
    Constitutional delay of puberty
   Delayed sexual development
E30.1 Precocious puberty
     Includes:
    Precocious menstruation
   Excludes:
  Albright(-McCune)(-Sternberg) syndrome (Q78.1)
 central precocious puberty (E22.8)
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (E25.0)
female heterosexual precocious pseudopuberty (E25.-)
male isosexual precocious pseudopuberty (E25.-)
E30.8 Other disorders of puberty
     Includes:
    Premature thelarche
E30.9 Disorder of puberty, unspecified
E31 Polyglandular dysfunction
Excludes:
ataxia telangiectasia [Louis-Bar] (G11.3)
dystrophia myotonica [Steinert] (G71.1)
pseudohypoparathyroidism (E20.1)
E31.0 Autoimmune polyglandular failure
     Includes:
    Schmidt's syndrome
E31.1 Polyglandular hyperfunction
     Excludes:
    multiple endocrine adenomatosis (D44.8)
E31.8 Other polyglandular dysfunction
E31.9 Polyglandular dysfunction, unspecified
E32
Diseases of thymus
Excludes:
aplasia or hypoplasia with immunodeficiency (D82.1)
myasthenia gravis (G70.0)
E32.0 Persistent hyperplasia of thymus
     Includes:
    Hypertrophy of thymus
E32.1 Abscess of thymus
E32.8 Other diseases of thymus
E32.9 Disease of thymus, unspecified
E34
Other endocrine disorders
Excludes:
pseudohypoparathyroidism (E20.1)
E34.0 Carcinoid syndrome
     Note:
    May be used as an additional code to identify functional activity associated with a carcinoid
   tumour.
  Includes:
 hormone secretion by carcinoid tumors
E34.1 Other hypersecretion of intestinal hormones
194
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E34.2 Ectopic hormone secretion, not elsewhere classified
E34.3 Short stature, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Short stature:
   •
    NOS
   •
    constitutional
   •
    Laron-type
   •
    psychosocial
   Excludes:
  progeria (E34.8)
 Russell-Silver syndrome (Q87.1)
short stature:
•
 achondroplastic (Q77.4)
•
 hypochondroplastic (Q77.4)
•
 in specific dysmorphic syndromes - code to syndrome - see Alphabetical Index
•
 nutritional (E45)
•
 pituitary (E23.0)
•
 renal (N25.0)
short-limbed stature with immunodeficiency (D82.2)
E34.4 Constitutional tall stature
     Includes:
    Constitutional gigantism
E34.5 Androgen resistance syndrome
     Includes:
    Male pseudohermaphroditism with androgen resistance
   Peripheral hormonal receptor disorder
  Reifenstein's syndrome
 Testicular feminization (syndrome)
E34.8 Other specified endocrine disorders
     Includes:
    Pineal gland dysfunction
   Progeria
E34.9 Endocrine disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Disturbance:
   •
    endocrine NOS
   •
    hormone NOS
E35*
E35.8*
Disorders of endocrine glands in diseases classified elsewhere
E35.0* Disorders of thyroid gland in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Tuberculosis of thyroid gland (A18.8†)
E35.1* Disorders of adrenal glands in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Tuberculous Addison's disease (A18.7†)
      Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome (meningococcal) (A39.1†)
E35.8* Disorders of other endocrine glands in diseases classified elsewhere
195
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E40
Malnutrition
(E40-E46)
Note:
Excludes:
E40
The degree of malnutrition is usually measured in terms of weight, expressed in standard deviations from the
mean of the relevant reference population. When one or more previous measurements are available, lack of
weight gain in children, or evidence of weight loss in children or adults, is usually indicative of malnutrition.
When only one measurement is available, the diagnosis is based on probabilities and is not definitive without
other clinical or laboratory tests. In the exceptional circumstances that no measurement of weight is available,
reliance should be placed on clinical evidence.
If an observed weight is below the mean value of the reference population, there is a high probability of severe
malnutrition if there is an observed value situated 3 or more standard deviations below the mean value of the
reference population; a high probability of moderate malnutrition for an observed value located between 2 and
less than 3 standard deviations below this mean; and a high probability of mild malnutrition for an observed
value located between 1 and less than 2 standard deviations below this mean.
intestinal malabsorption (K90.-)
nutritional anaemias (D50-D53)
sequelae of protein-energy malnutrition (E64.0)
slim disease (B24)
starvation (T73.0)
Kwashiorkor
Includes:
Excludes:
E41
Nutritional marasmus
Includes:
Excludes:
E42
severe protein-energy malnutrition [as in E43] intermediate form
severe protein-energy malnutrition [as in E43] with signs of both kwashiorkor and marasmus
Unspecified severe protein-energy malnutrition
Note:
Includes:
E44
severe malnutrition with marasmus
marasmic kwashiorkor (E42)
Marasmic kwashiorkor
Includes:
E43
severe malnutrition with nutritional oedema with dypsigmentation of skin and hair.
marasmic kwashiorkor (E42)
Severe loss of weight [wasting] in children or adults, or lack of weight gain in children leading
to an observed weight that is at least 3 standard deviations below the mean value for the
reference population (or a similar loss expressed through other statistical approaches). When
only one measurement is available, there is a high probability of severe wasting when the
observed weight is 3 or more standard deviations below the mean of the reference population.
starvation oedema
Protein-energy malnutrition of moderate and mild degree
E44.0 Moderate protein-energy malnutrition
     Note:
    Weight loss in children or adults, or lack of weight gain in children leading to an observed weight
   that is 2 or more but less than 3 standard deviations below the mean value for the reference
  population (or a similar loss expressed through other statistical approaches). When only one
 measurement is available, there is a high probability of moderate protein-energy malnutrition
when the observed weight is 2 or more but less than 3 standard deviations below the mean of the
reference population.
E44.1 Mild protein-energy malnutrition
     Note:
    Weight loss in children or adults, or lack of weight gain in children leading to an observed weight
   that is 1 or more but less than 2 standard deviations below the mean value for the reference
  population (or a similar loss expressed through other statistical approaches). When only one
 measurement is available, there is a high probability of mild protein-energy malnutrition when
the observed weight is 1 or more but less than 2 standard deviations below the mean of the
reference population.
196
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E45
Retarded development following protein-energy malnutrition
Includes:
E46
nutritional:
•
short stature
•
stunting
physical retardation due to malnutrition
E46
Unspecified protein-energy malnutrition
Includes:
malnutrition NOS
protein-energy imbalance NOS
197
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E50
Other nutritional deficiencies
(E50-E64)
Excludes:
E50
nutritional anaemias (D50-D53)
Vitamin A deficiency
Excludes:
sequelae of vitamin A deficiency (E64.1)
E50.0 Vitamin A deficiency with conjunctival xerosis
E50.1 Vitamin A deficiency with Bitot's spot and conjunctival xerosis
     Includes:
    Bitot's spot in the young child
E50.2 Vitamin A deficiency with corneal xerosis
E50.3 Vitamin A deficiency with corneal ulceration and xerosis
E50.4 Vitamin A deficiency with keratomalacia
E50.5 Vitamin A deficiency with night blindness
E50.6 Vitamin A deficiency with xerophthalmic scars of cornea
E50.7 Other ocular manifestations of vitamin A deficiency
     Includes:
    Xerophthalmia NOS
E50.8 Other manifestations of vitamin A deficiency
     Includes:
    Follicular keratosis due to vitamin A deficiency† (L86.*)
     Xeroderma due to vitamin A deficiency† (L86.*)
E50.9 Vitamin A deficiency, unspecified
     Includes:
    Hypovitaminosis A NOS
E51
Thiamine deficiency
Excludes:
E51.1
Beriberi
Includes:
sequelae of thiamine deficiency (E64.8)
Beriberi:
•
dry
•
wet† (I98.8*)
E51.2 Wernicke's encephalopathy
E51.8 Other manifestations of thiamine deficiency
E51.9 Thiamine deficiency, unspecified
E52 Niacin deficiency [pellagra]
Includes:
Excludes:
E53
Deficiency:
•
niacin(-tryptophan)
•
nicotinamide
Pellagra (alcoholic)
sequelae of niacin deficiency (E64.8)
Deficiency of other B group vitamins
Excludes:
sequelae of vitamin B deficiency (E64.8)
vitamin B12 deficiency anaemia (D51.-)
E53.0 Riboflavin deficiency
     Includes:
    Ariboflavinosis
E53.1 Pyridoxine deficiency
     Includes:
    Vitamin B6 deficiency
   Excludes:
  pyridoxine-responsive sideroblastic anaemia (D64.3)
198
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E53.8
E53.9
E54
Deficiency of other specified B group vitamins
Includes:
Deficiency:
•
biotin
•
cyanocobalamin
•
folate
•
folic acid
•
pantothenic acid
•
vitamin B12
Vitamin B deficiency, unspecified
Ascorbic acid deficiency
Includes:
Excludes:
E55
E59
deficiency of vitamin C
scurvy
scorbutic anaemia (D53.2)
sequelae of vitamin C deficiency (E64.2)
Vitamin D deficiency
Excludes:
adult osteomalacia (M83.-)
osteoporosis (M80-M81)
sequelae of rickets (E64.3)
E55.0 Rickets, active
     Includes:
    Osteomalacia:
   •
    infantile
   •
    juvenile
   Excludes:
  rickets:
 •
  coeliac (K90.0)
 •
  Crohn's (K50.-)
 •
  inactive (E64.3)
 •
  renal (N25.0)
 •
  vitamin-D-resistant (E83.3)
E55.9 Vitamin D deficiency, unspecified
     Includes:
    Avitaminosis D
E56
Other vitamin deficiencies
Excludes:
sequelae of other vitamin deficiencies (E64.8)
E56.0 Deficiency of vitamin E
E56.1 Deficiency of vitamin K
     Excludes:
    deficiency of coagulation factor due to vitamin K deficiency (D68.4)
   vitamin K deficiency of newborn (P53)
E56.8 Deficiency of other vitamins
E56.9 Vitamin deficiency, unspecified
E58
Dietary calcium deficiency
Excludes:
E59
disorder of calcium metabolism (E83.5)
sequelae of calcium deficiency (E64.8)
Dietary selenium deficiency
Includes:
Excludes:
Keshan disease
sequelae of selenium deficiency (E64.8)
199
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E60 
E60
Dietary zinc deficiency
E61 Deficiency of other nutrient elements
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
Excludes:
disorders of mineral metabolism (E83.-)
iodine-deficiency-related thyroid disorders (E00-E02)
sequelae of malnutrition and other nutritional deficiencies (E64.-)
E61.0 Copper deficiency
E61.1 Iron deficiency
     Excludes:
    iron deficiency anaemia (D50.-)
E61.2 Magnesium deficiency
E61.3 Manganese deficiency
E61.4 Chromium deficiency
E61.5 Molybdenum deficiency
E61.6 Vanadium deficiency
E61.7 Deficiency of multiple nutrient elements
E61.8 Deficiency of other specified nutrient elements
E61.9 Deficiency of nutrient element, unspecified
E63
Other nutritional deficiencies
Excludes:
dehydration (E86)
failure to thrive (R62.8)
feeding problems in newborn (P92.-)
sequelae of malnutrition and other nutritional deficiencies (E64.-)
E63.0 Essential fatty acid [EFA] deficiency
E63.1 Imbalance of constituents of food intake
E63.8 Other specified nutritional deficiencies
E63.9 Nutritional deficiency, unspecified
     Includes:
    Nutritional cardiomyopathy NOS† (I43.2*)
E64
Sequelae of malnutrition and other nutritional deficiencies
Note:
Not to be used for chronic malnutrition or nutritional deficiency. Code these to current
malnutrition or nutritional deficiency.
E64.0 Sequelae of protein-energy malnutrition
     Excludes:
    retarded development following protein-energy malnutrition (E45)
E64.1 Sequelae of vitamin A deficiency
E64.2 Sequelae of vitamin C deficiency
E64.3 Sequelae of rickets
     Note:
    Use additional code, (M40.1, M41.5), to identify spinal deformity
E64.8 Sequelae of other nutritional deficiencies
E64.9 Sequelae of unspecified nutritional deficiency
200
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
Obesity and other hyperalimentation
(E65-E68)
E65
Localized adiposity
Includes:
E66
E68
abdominal pannus
fat pad
Obesity
Excludes:
adiposogenital dystrophy (E23.6)
lipomatosis:
•
NOS (E88.2)
•
dolorosa [Dercum] (E88.2)
Prader-Willi syndrome (Q87.1)
E66.0 Obesity due to excess calories
E66.1 Drug-induced obesity
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
E66.2 Extreme obesity with alveolar hypoventilation
     Includes:
    Pickwickian syndrome
E66.8 Other obesity
     Includes:
    Morbid obesity
E66.9 Obesity, unspecified
     Includes:
    Simple obesity NOS
E67 Other hyperalimentation
Excludes:
hyperalimentation NOS (R63.2)
sequelae of hyperalimentation (E68)
E67.0 Hypervitaminosis A
E67.1 Hypercarotenaemia
E67.2 Megavitamin-B6 syndrome
E67.3 Hypervitaminosis D
E67.8 Other specified hyperalimentation
E68
Sequelae of hyperalimentation
Note:
Not to be used for chronic hyperalimentation. Code these to current hyperalimentation.
201
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E70
Metabolic disorders
(E70-E90)
Excludes:
E70
5-alpha -reductase deficiency (E29.1)
androgen resistance syndrome (E34.5)
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (E25.0)
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (Q79.6)
haemolytic anaemias due to enzyme disorders (D55.-)
Marfan's syndrome (Q87.4)
Disorders of aromatic amino-acid metabolism
E70.0 Classical phenylketonuria
E70.1 Other hyperphenylalaninaemias
E70.2 Disorders of tyrosine metabolism
     Includes:
    Alkaptonuria
   Hypertyrosinaemia
  Ochronosis
 Tyrosinaemia
Tyrosinosis
E70.3 Albinism
     Includes:
Albinism:
•
ocular
•
oculocutaneous
Syndrome:
•
Chediak(-Steinbrinck)-Higashi
•
Cross
•
Hermansky-Pudlak
Waardenberg's syndrome
E70.8 Other disorders of aromatic amino-acid metabolism
     Includes:
    Disorders of:
   •
    histidine metabolism
   •
    tryptophan metabolism
E70.9 Disorder of aromatic amino-acid metabolism, unspecified
E71
Disorders of branched-chain amino-acid metabolism and fatty-acid
metabolism
E71.0 Maple-syrup-urine disease
E71.1 Other disorders of branched-chain amino-acid metabolism
     Includes:
    Hyperleucine-isoleucinaemia
   Hypervalinaemia
  Isovaleric acidaemia
 Methylmalonic acidaemia
Propionic acidaemia
E71.2 Disorder of branched-chain amino-acid metabolism, unspecified
E71.3 Disorders of fatty-acid metabolism
     Includes:
    Adrenoleukodystrophy [Addison-Schilder]
   Muscle carnitine palmityltransferase deficiency
  Excludes:
 Schilder's disease (G37.0)
202
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E72
Other disorders of amino-acid metabolism
Excludes:
abnormal findings without manifest disease (R70-R89)
disorders of:
•
aromatic amino-acid metabolism (E70.-)
•
branched-chain amino-acid metabolism (E71.0-E71.2)
•
fatty-acid metabolism (E71.3)
•
purine and pyrimidine metabolism (E79.-)
gout (M10.-)
E72.0 Disorders of amino-acid transport
     Includes:
    Cystine storage disease † (N29.8*)
     Cystinosis
    Cystinuria
   Fanconi(-de Toni)(-Debré) syndrome
   Hartnup's disease
  Lowe's syndrome
 Excludes:
disorders of tryptophan metabolism (E70.8)
E72.1 Disorders of sulfur-bearing amino-acid metabolism
     Includes:
    Cystathioninuria
   Homocystinuria
  Hyperhomocysteinemia
 Methioninaemia
Sulfite oxidase deficiency
Excludes:
transcobalamin II deficiency (D51.2)
E72.2 Disorders of urea cycle metabolism
     Includes:
    Argininaemia
   Argininosuccinic aciduria
  Citrullinaemia
 Hyperammonaemia
Excludes:
disorders of ornithine metabolism (E72.4)
E72.3 Disorders of lysine and hydroxylysine metabolism
     Includes:
    Glutaric aciduria
   Hydroxylysinaemia
  Hyperlysinaemia
 Excludes:
Refsum's disease (G60.1)
Zellweger's syndrome (Q87.8)
E72.4 Disorders of ornithine metabolism
     Includes:
    Ornithinaemia (types I, II)
E72.5 Disorders of glycine metabolism
     Includes:
    Hyperhydroxyprolinaemia
   Hyperprolinaemia (types I, II)
  Non-ketotic hyperglycinaemia
 Sarcosinaemia
E72.8 Other specified disorders of amino-acid metabolism
     Includes:
    Disorders of:
   •
    β-amino-acid metabolism
    •
     gamma-glutamyl cycle
E72.9 
E73.9
Disorder of amino-acid metabolism, unspecified
E73
Lactose intolerance
E73.0 Congenital lactase deficiency
E73.1 Secondary lactase deficiency
E73.8 Other lactose intolerance
E73.9 Lactose intolerance, unspecified
203
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E74
Other disorders of carbohydrate metabolism
Excludes:
E74
diabetes mellitus (E10-E14)
hypoglycaemia NOS (E16.2)
increased secretion of glucagon (E16.3)
mucopolysaccharidosis (E76.0-E76.3)
E74.0 Glycogen storage disease
     Includes:
    Cardiac glycogenosis
   Disease:
  •
   Andersen
  •
   Cori
  •
   Forbes
  •
   Hers
  •
   McArdle
  •
   Pompe
  •
   Tarui
  •
   Tauri
  •
   von Gierke
  Liver phosphorylase deficiency
E74.1 Disorders of fructose metabolism
     Includes:
    Essential fructosuria
   Fructose-1,6-diphosphatase deficiency
  Hereditary fructose intolerance
E74.2 Disorders of galactose metabolism
     Includes:
    Galactokinase deficiency
   Galactosaemia
E74.3 Other disorders of intestinal carbohydrate absorption
     Includes:
    Glucose-galactose malabsorption
   Sucrase deficiency
  Excludes:
 lactose intolerance (E73.-)
E74.4 Disorders of pyruvate metabolism and gluconeogenesis
     Includes:
    Deficiency of:
   •
    phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
   •
    pyruvate:
   •
    carboxylase
   •
    dehydrogenase
   Excludes:
  with anaemia (D55.-)
E74.8 Other specified disorders of carbohydrate metabolism
     Includes:
    Essential pentosuria
   Oxalosis
  Oxaluria
 Renal glycosuria
E74.9 Disorder of carbohydrate metabolism, unspecified
E75
Disorders of sphingolipid metabolism and other lipid storage disorders
Excludes:
E75.0
204
mucolipidosis, types I-III (E77.0-E77.1)
Refsum's disease (G60.1)
GM2 gangliosidosis
Includes:
Disease:
•
Sandhoff
•
Tay-Sachs
GM2 gangliosidosis:
•
NOS
•
adult
•
juvenile
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E75.1
Other gangliosidosis
Includes:
Gangliosidosis:
•
NOS
•
GM1
•
GM3
Mucolipidosis IV
E75.2 Other sphingolipidosis
     Includes:
    Disease:
   •
    Fabry(-Anderson)
   •
    Gaucher
   •
    Krabbe
   •
    Niemann-Pick
   Faber's syndrome
  Metachromatic leukodystrophy
 Sulfatase deficiency
Excludes:
adrenoleukodystrophy [Addison-Schilder] (E71.3)
E75.3 Sphingolipidosis, unspecified
E75.4 Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
     Includes:
    Disease:
   •
    Batten
   •
    Bielschowsky-Jansky
   •
    Kufs
   •
    Spielmeyer-Vogt
E75.5 Other lipid storage disorders
     Includes:
    Cerebrotendinous cholesterosis [van Bogaert-Scherer-Epstein]
   Wolman's disease
E75.6 
E76.9
Lipid storage disorder, unspecified
E76
Disorders of glycosaminoglycan metabolism
E76.0 Mucopolysaccharidosis, type I
     Includes:
    Syndrome:
   •
    Hurler
   •
    Hurler-Scheie
   •
    Scheie
E76.1 Mucopolysaccharidosis, type II
     Includes:
    Hunter's syndrome
E76.2 Other mucopolysaccharidoses
     Includes:
    β-Glucuronidase deficiency
    Mucopolysaccharidosis, types III, IV, VI, VII
   Syndrome:
  •
   Maroteaux-Lamy (mild)(severe)
  •
   Morquio(-like)(classic)
  •
   Sanfilippo (type B)(type C)(type D)
E76.3 Mucopolysaccharidosis, unspecified
E76.8 Other disorders of glucosaminoglycan metabolism
E76.9 Disorder of glucosaminoglycan metabolism, unspecified
205
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E77
E77
Disorders of glycoprotein metabolism
E77.0 Defects in post-translational modification of lysosomal enzymes
     Includes:
    Mucolipidosis II:
   •
    [I-cell disease]
   •
    I [pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy]
E77.1 Defects in glycoprotein degradation
     Includes:
    Aspartylglucosaminuria
   Fucosidosis
  Mannosidosis
 Sialidosis [mucolipidosis I]
E77.8 Other disorders of glycoprotein metabolism
E77.9 Disorder of glycoprotein metabolism, unspecified
E78
Disorders of lipoprotein metabolism and other lipidaemias
Excludes:
sphingolipidosis (E75.0-E75.3)
E78.0 Pure hypercholesterolaemia
     Includes:
    Familial hypercholesterolaemia
   Fredrickson's hyperlipoproteinaemia, type IIa
  Hyperbetalipoproteinaemia
 Hyperlipidaemia, group A
Low-density-lipoprotein-type [LDL] hyperlipoproteinaemia
E78.1 Pure hyperglyceridaemia
     Includes:
    (Essential) hypertriglyceridaemia
   Endogenous hyperglyceridaemia
  Fredrickson's hyperlipoproteinaemia, type IV
 Hyperlipidaemia, group B
Hyperprebetalipoproteinaemia
Very-low-density-lipoprotein-type [VLDL] hyperlipoproteinaemia
E78.2 Mixed hyperlipidaemia
     Includes:
    Broad- or floating-betalipoproteinaemia
   Fredrickson's hyperlipoproteinaemia, type IIb or III
  Hyperbetalipoproteinaemia with prebetalipoproteinaemia
 Hypercholesterolaemia with endogenous hyperglyceridaemia
Hyperlipidaemia, group C
Tubero-eruptive xanthoma
Xanthoma tuberosum
Excludes:
cerebrotendinous cholesterosis [van Bogaert-Scherer-Epstein] (E75.5)
E78.3 Hyperchylomicronaemia
     Includes:
    Fredrickson's hyperlipoproteinaemia, type I or V
   Hyperlipidaemia, group D
  Mixed hyperglyceridaemia
E78.4 Other hyperlipidaemia
     Includes:
    Familial combined hyperlipidaemia
E78.5 Hyperlipidaemia, unspecified
E78.6 Lipoprotein deficiency
     Includes:
    Abetalipoproteinaemia
   High-density lipoprotein deficiency
  Hypoalphalipoproteinaemia
 Hypobetalipoproteinaemia (familial)
Lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency
Tangier disease
E78.8 Other disorders of lipoprotein metabolism
206
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E78.9
E79
Disorder of lipoprotein metabolism, unspecified
Disorders of purine and pyrimidine metabolism
Excludes:
E83.19o
calculus of kidney (N20.0)
combined immunodeficiency disorders (D81.-)
gout (M10.-)
orotaciduric anaemia (D53.0)
xeroderma pigmentosum (Q82.1)
E79.0 Hyperuricaemia without signs of inflammatory arthritis and tophaceous disease
     Includes:
    Asymptomatic hyperuricaemia
E79.1 Lesch-Nyhan syndrome
E79.8 Other disorders of purine and pyrimidine metabolism
     Includes:
    Hereditary xanthinuria
E79.9 Disorder of purine and pyrimidine metabolism, unspecified
E80 Disorders of porphyrin and bilirubin metabolism
Includes:
defects of catalase and peroxidase
E80.0 Hereditary erythropoietic porphyria
     Includes:
    Congenital erythropoietic porphyria
   Erythropoietic protoporphyria
E80.1 Porphyria cutanea tarda
E80.2 Other porphyria
     Includes:
    Hereditary coproporphyria
   Porphyria:
  •
   NOS
  •
   acute intermittent (hepatic)
  •
   variegata
  Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
E80.3 Defects of catalase and peroxidase
     Includes:
    Acatalasia [Takahara]
E80.4 Gilbert's syndrome
E80.5 Crigler-Najjar syndrome
E80.6 Other disorders of bilirubin metabolism
     Includes:
    Dubin-Johnson syndrome
   Rotor's syndrome
E80.7 Disorder of bilirubin metabolism, unspecified
E83
Disorders of mineral metabolism
Excludes:
dietary mineral deficiency (E58-E61)
parathyroid disorders (E20-E21)
vitamin D deficiency (E55.-)
E83.0 Disorders of copper metabolism
     Includes:
    Menkes' (kinky hair)(steely hair) disease
   Wilson's disease
E83.1 Disorders of iron metabolism
     Excludes:
    anaemia:
   •
    iron deficiency (D50.-)
   •
    sideroblastic (D64.0-D64.3)
E83.10o Haemochromatosis
E83.18o Other disorders of iron metabolism
E83.19o Disorders of iron metabolism, unspecified
207
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E83.2 
E83.2
Disorders of zinc metabolism
Includes:
Acrodermatitis enteropathica
E83.3 Disorders of phosphorus metabolism and phosphatases
     Includes:
    Acid phosphatase deficiency
   Familial hypophosphataemia
  Hypophosphatasia
 Vitamin-D-resistant:
•
 osteomalacia† (M90.8*)
  •
   rickets† (M90.8*)
    Excludes:
   adult osteomalacia (M83.-)
  osteoporosis (M80-M81)
E83.4 Disorders of magnesium metabolism
     Includes:
    Hypermagnesaemia
   Hypomagnesaemia
E83.5 Disorders of calcium metabolism
     Includes:
    Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia
   Idiopathic hypercalciuria
  Excludes:
 chondrocalcinosis (M11.1-M11.2)
hyperparathyroidism (E21.0-E21.3)
E83.8† Other disorders of mineral metabolism
E83.9 Disorder of mineral metabolism, unspecified
E84
Cystic fibrosis
Includes:
mucoviscidosis
E84.0 Cystic fibrosis with pulmonary manifestations
E84.1 Cystic fibrosis with intestinal manifestations
     Includes:
    Distal intestinal obstruction syndrome
   Meconium ileus in cystic fibrosis † (P75*)
    Excludes:
   meconium obstruction (ileus) in cases where cystic fibrosis is known not to be present (P76.0)
E84.8 Cystic fibrosis with other manifestations
     Includes:
    Cystic fibrosis with combined manifestations
E84.9 Cystic fibrosis, unspecified
E85
Amyloidosis
Excludes:
Alzheimer's disease (G30.-)
E85.0 Non-neuropathic heredofamilial amyloidosis
     Includes:
    Familial Mediterranean fever
   Hereditary amyloid nephropathy
E85.1 Neuropathic heredofamilial amyloidosis
     Includes:
    Amyloid polyneuropathy (Portuguese)
E85.2 Heredofamilial amyloidosis, unspecified
E85.3 Secondary systemic amyloidosis
     Includes:
    Haemodialysis-associated amyloidosis
E85.4 Organ-limited amyloidosis
     Includes:
    Localized amyloidosis
E85.8 Other amyloidosis
E85.9 Amyloidosis, unspecified
208
ENDOCRINE, NUTRITIONAL AND METABOLIC DISEASES (E00-E90)
E86
Volume depletion
Excludes:
dehydration of newborn (P74.1)
hypovolaemic shock:
•
NOS (R57.1)
•
postoperative (T81.1)
•
traumatic (T79.4)
E86.0o Dehydration
E86.8o 
E87.8
Other volume depletion
Includes:
Depletion of volume of plasma or extracellular fluid
Hypovolaemia
E87
Other disorders of fluid, electrolyte and acid-base balance
E87.0 Hyperosmolality and hypernatraemia
     Includes:
    Sodium [Na]:
   •
    excess
   •
    overload
   Excludes:
  newborn hypernatraemia (P74.21)
E87.1 Hypo-osmolality and hyponatraemia
     Includes:
    Sodium [Na] deficiency
   Excludes:
  newborn hyponatremia (P74.20)
 Syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (E22.2)
E87.2 Acidosis
     Includes:
Excludes:
E87.3
Alkalosis
Includes:
Acidosis:
•
NOS
•
lactic
•
metabolic
•
respiratory
carbon dioxide retention
diabetic acidosis (E10-E14 with common fourth character .1)
Alkalosis:
•
NOS
•
metabolic
•
respiratory
E87.4 Mixed disorder of acid-base balance
E87.5 Hyperkalaemia
     Includes:
    Potassium [K]:
   •
    excess
   •
    overload
   Excludes:
  newborn hyperkalaemia (P74.31)
E87.6 Hypokalaemia
     Includes:
    Potassium [K] deficiency
   Excludes:
  newborn hypokalaemia (P74.30)
E87.7 Fluid overload
     Excludes:
    oedema (R60.-)
E87.8 Other disorders of electrolyte and fluid balance, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Electrolyte imbalance NOS
   Hyperchloraemia
  Hypochloraemia
209
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
E88
Other metabolic disorders
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
Excludes:
histiocytosis X (chronic) (D76.0)
E88
E88.0 Disorders of plasma-protein metabolism, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    alpha-1-Antitrypsin deficiency
   Bisalbuminaemia
  Excludes:
 disorder of lipoprotein metabolism (E78.-)
monoclonal gammopathy (D47.2)
polyclonal hypergammaglobulinaemia (D89.0)
Waldenström's macroglobulinaemia (C88.00)
E88.1 Lipodystrophy, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Lipodystrophy NOS
   Excludes:
  Whipple's disease (K90.8)
E88.2 Lipomatosis, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Lipomatosis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    dolorosa [Dercum]
E88.3 Tumour lysis syndrome
     Includes:
    Tumour lysis (following antineoplastic drug therapy) (spontaneous)
E88.8 Other specified metabolic disorders
E88.80o Metabolic syndrome
       Includes:
      Dysmetabolic syndrome
     Insulin resistance syndrome
    Syndrome X
   Excludes:
  diabetes mellitus (E10-E14)
E88.88o Other specified metabolic disorders
       Includes:
      Launois-Bensaude adenolipomatosis
     Trimethylaminuria
E88.9 Metabolic disorder, unspecified
E89
Postprocedural endocrine and metabolic disorders, not elsewhere classified
E89.0 Postprocedural hypothyroidism
     Includes:
    Postirradiation hypothyroidism
   Postsurgical hypothyroidism
E89.1 Postprocedural hypoinsulinaemia
     Includes:
    Postpancreatectomy hyperglycaemia
   Postsurgical hypoinsulinaemia (of the non-diabetic)
E89.2 Postprocedural hypoparathyroidism
     Includes:
    Parathyroprival tetany
E89.3 Postprocedural hypopituitarism
     Includes:
    Postirradiation hypopituitarism
E89.4 Postprocedural ovarian failure
E89.5 Postprocedural testicular hypofunction
E89.6 Postprocedural adrenocortical(-medullary) hypofunction
E89.8 Other postprocedural endocrine and metabolic disorders
E89.9 Postprocedural endocrine and metabolic disorder, unspecified
E90*
210
Nutritional and metabolic disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
I
CHAPTER V
Mental and behavioural disorders
(F00-F99)
Includes:
Excludes:
disorders of psychological development
symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified (R00-R99)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
F00-F09
F10-F19
F20-F29
F30-F39
F40-F48
F50-F59
F60-F69
F70-F79
F80-F89
F90-F98
F99-F99
Organic, including symptomatic, mental disorders
Mental and behavioural disorders due to psychoactive substance use
Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders
Mood [affective] disorders
Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders
Behavioural syndromes associated with physiological disturbances and physical factors
Disorders of adult personality and behaviour
Mental retardation
Disorders of psychological development
Behavioural and emotional disorders with onset usually occurring in childhood
and adolescence
Unspecified mental disorder (F99)
Asterisk categories for this chapter are provided as follows:
F00*
F02*
Dementia in Alzheimer's disease (G30.-†)
Dementia in other diseases classified elsewhere
211
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F00*
Organic, including symptomatic, mental disorders
(F00-F09)
Note:
This block comprises a range of mental disorders grouped together on the basis of their having in common a
demonstrable etiology in cerebral disease, brain injury, or other insult leading to cerebral dysfunction. The
dysfunction may be primary, as in diseases, injuries, and insults that affect the brain directly and selectively; or
secondary, as in systemic diseases and disorders that attack the brain only as one of the multiple organs or
systems of the body that are involved.
Dementia (F00-F03) is a syndrome due to disease of the brain, usually of a chronic or progressive nature, in
which there is disturbance of multiple higher cortical functions, including memory, thinking, orientation,
comprehension, calculation, learning capacity, language, and judgement. Consciousness is not clouded. The
impairments of cognitive function are commonly accompanied, and occasionally preceded, by deterioration in
emotional control, social behaviour, or motivation. This syndrome occurs in Alzheimer's disease, in
cerebrovascular disease, and in other conditions primarily or secondarily affecting the brain.
Use additional code to identify the underlying disease.
F00*
Dementia in Alzheimer's disease (G30.-†)
Note:
Alzheimer's disease is a primary degenerative cerebral disease of unknown etiology with
characteristic neuropathological and neurochemical features. The disorder is usually insidious
in onset and develops slowly but steadily over a period of several years.
F00.0* Dementia in Alzheimer's disease with early onset (G30.0†)
        Note:
       Dementia in Alzheimer's disease with onset before the age of 65, with a relatively rapid
      deteriorating course and with marked multiple disorders of the higher cortical functions.
     Includes:
    Alzheimer's disease, type 2
   Presenile dementia, Alzheimer's type
  Primary degenerative dementia of the Alzheimer's type, presenile onset
F00.1* Dementia in Alzheimer's disease with late onset (G30.1†)
        Note:
       Dementia in Alzheimer's disease with onset after the age of 65, usually in the late 7Os or
      thereafter, with a slow progression, and with memory impairment as the principal feature.
     Includes:
    Alzheimer's disease, type 1
   Primary degenerative dementia of the Alzheimer's type, senile onset
  Senile dementia, Alzheimer's type
F00.2* Dementia in Alzheimer's disease, atypical or mixed type (G30.8†)
        Includes:
       Atypical dementia, Alzheimer's type
F00.9* Dementia in Alzheimer's disease, unspecified (G30.9†)
F01
Vascular dementia
Note:
Includes:
Vascular dementia is the result of infarction of the brain due to vascular disease, including
hypertensive cerebrovascular disease. The infarcts are usually small but cumulative in their
effect. Onset is usually in later life.
arteriosclerotic dementia
F01.0 Vascular dementia of acute onset
     Note:
    Usually develops rapidly after a succession of strokes from cerebrovascular thrombosis,
   embolism or haemorrhage. In rare cases, a single large infarction may be the cause.
F01.1 Multi-infarct dementia
     Note:
    Gradual in onset, following a number of transient ischaemic episodes which produce an
   accumulation of infarcts in the cerebral parenchyma.
  Includes:
 Predominantly cortical dementia
Use additional code from category E10-E14 with fourth and fifth characters .52 to classify any associated
diabetes mellitus.
212
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F01.2
Subcortical vascular dementia
Note:
Includes cases with a history of hypertension and foci of ischaemic destruction in the deep white
matter of the cerebral hemispheres. The cerebral cortex is usually preserved and this contrasts
with the clinical picture which may closely resemble that of dementia in Alzheimer's disease.
F01.3 Mixed cortical and subcortical vascular dementia
F01.8 Other vascular dementia
F01.9 
F02.8*
Vascular dementia, unspecified
F02*
Dementia in other diseases classified elsewhere
Note:
Cases of dementia due, or presumed to be due, to causes other than Alzheimer's disease or
cerebrovascular disease. Onset may be at any time in life, though rarely in old age.
F02.0* Dementia in Pick's disease (G31.0†)
        Note:
       A progressive dementia, commencing in middle age, characterized by early, slowly progressing
      changes of character and social deterioration, followed by impairment of intellect, memory, and
     language functions, with apathy, euphoria and, occasionally, extrapyramidal phenomena.
F02.1* Dementia in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (A81.0†)
        Note:
       A progressive dementia with extensive neurological signs, due to specific neuropathological
      changes that are presumed to be caused by a transmissible agent. Onset is usually in middle or
     later life, but may be at any adult age. The course is subacute, leading to death within one to two
    years.
F02.2* Dementia in Huntington's disease (G10†)
        Note:
       A dementia occurring as part of a widespread degeneration of the brain. The disorder is
      transmitted by a single autosomal dominant gene. Symptoms typically emerge in the third and
     fourth decade. Progression is slow, leading to death usually within 10 to 15 years.
    Includes:
   Dementia in Huntington's chorea
F02.3* Dementia in Parkinson's disease (G20†)
        Note:
       A dementia developing in the course of established Parkinson's disease. No particular
      distinguishing clinical features have yet been demonstrated.
     Includes:
    Dementia in:
   •
    paralysis agitans
   •
    parkinsonism
F02.4* Dementia in human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease (B24†)
        Note:
       Dementia developing in the course of HIV disease, in the absence of a concurrent illness or
      condition other than HIV infection that could explain the clinical features.
F02.8* Dementia in other specified diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Dementia (in):
    •
     cerebral lipidosis (E75.-†)
      •
       epilepsy (G40.-†)
        •
         hepatolenticular degeneration (E83.0†)
          •
           hypercalcaemia (E83.5†)
            •
             hypothyroidism, acquired (E01.-†, E03.-†)
                •
                 intoxications (T36-T65†)
                  •
                   multiple sclerosis (G35†)
                    •
                     neurosyphilis (A52.1†)
                      •
                       niacin deficiency [pellagra] (E52†)
                        •
                         polyarteritis nodosa (M30.0†)
                          •
                           systemic lupus erythematosus (M32.-†)
                            •
                             trypanosomiasis (B56.-†, B57.-†)
                                •
                                 uraemia (N18.5†)
                                  •
                                   vitamin B 12 deficiency (E53.8†)
213
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F03
Unspecified dementia
Includes:
F03
Excludes:
F04
Organic amnesic syndrome, not induced by alcohol and other psychoactive
substances
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
F05
Presenile:
•
dementia NOS
•
psychosis NOS
Primary degenerative dementia NOS
Psychosis NOS
Senile dementia:
•
NOS
•
depressed or paranoid type
senile dementia with delirium or acute confusional state (F05.1)
senility NOS (R54)
A syndrome of prominent impairment of recent and remote memory while immediate recall is
preserved, with reduced ability to learn new material and disorientation in time. Confabulation
may be a marked feature, but perception and other cognitive functions, including the intellect,
are usually intact. The prognosis depends on the course of the underlying lesion.
Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome, nonalcoholic
amnesia:
•
NOS (R41.3)
•
anterograde (R41.1)
•
dissociative (F44.0)
•
retrograde (R41.2)
Korsakov's syndrome:
•
alcohol-induced or unspecified (F10.6)
•
induced by other psychoactive substances (F11-F19 with common fourth character .6)
Delirium, not induced by alcohol and other psychoactive substances
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
An etiologically nonspecific organic cerebral syndrome characterized by concurrent
disturbances of consciousness and attention, perception, thinking, memory, psychomotor
behaviour, emotion, and the sleep-wake schedule. The duration is variable and the degree of
severity ranges from mild to very severe.
acute or subacute:
•
brain syndrome
•
confusional state (nonalcoholic)
•
infective psychosis
•
organic reaction
•
psycho-organic syndrome
delirium tremens, alcohol-induced or unspecified (F10.4)
F05.0 Delirium not superimposed on dementia, so described
F05.1 Delirium superimposed on dementia
     Includes:
    Conditions meeting the above criteria but developing in the course of a dementia (F00-F03)
F05.8 Other delirium
     Includes:
    Delirium of mixed origin
   Postoperative delirium
F05.9 Delirium, unspecified
F06
Other mental disorders due to brain damage and dysfunction and to physical
disease
Note:
Excludes:
214
Includes miscellaneous conditions causally related to brain disorder due to primary cerebral
disease, to systemic disease affecting the brain secondarily, to exogenous toxic substances or
hormones, to endocrine disorders, or to other somatic illnesses.
associated with:
•
delirium (F05.-)
•
dementia as classified in F00-F03
resulting from use of alcohol and other psychoactive substances (F10-F19)
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F06.0
Organic hallucinosis
Note:
A disorder of persistent or recurrent hallucinations, usually visual or auditory, that occur in clear
consciousness and may or may not be recognized by the subject as such. Delusional elaboration
of the hallucinations may occur, but delusions do not dominate the clinical picture; insight may
be preserved.
Includes:
Organic hallucinatory state (nonalcoholic)
Excludes:
alcoholic hallucinosis (F10.5)
schizophrenia (F20.-)
F06.1 Organic catatonic disorder
     Note:
    A disorder of diminished (stupor) or increased (excitement) psychomotor activity associated
   with catatonic symptoms. The extremes of psychomotor disturbance may alternate.
  Excludes:
 catatonic schizophrenia (F20.2)
stupor:
•
 NOS (R40.1)
•
 dissociative (F44.2)
F06.2 Organic delusional [schizophrenia-like] disorder
     Note:
    A disorder in which persistent or recurrent delusions dominate the clinical picture. The delusions
   may be accompanied by hallucinations. Some features suggestive of schizophrenia, such as
  bizarre hallucinations or thought disorder, may be present.
 Includes:
Paranoid and paranoid-hallucinatory organic states
Schizophrenia-like psychosis in epilepsy
Excludes:
disorder:
•
 acute and transient psychotic (F23.-)
•
 persistent delusional (F22.-)
•
 psychotic drug-induced (F11-F19 with common fourth character .5)
schizophrenia (F20.-)
F06.3 Organic mood [affective] disorders
     Note:
    Disorders characterized by a change in mood or affect, usually accompanied by a change in the
   overall level of activity, depressive, hypomanic, manic or bipolar (see F30-F38), but arising as
  a consequence of an organic disorder.
 Excludes:
mood disorders, nonorganic or unspecified (F30-F38)
F06.4 Organic anxiety disorder
     Note:
    A disorder characterized by the essential descriptive features of a generalized anxiety disorder
   (F41.1), a panic disorder (F41.0), or a combination of both, but arising as a consequence of an
  organic disorder.
 Excludes:
anxiety disorders, nonorganic or unspecified (F41.-)
F06.5 Organic dissociative disorder
     Note:
    A disorder characterized by a partial or complete loss of the normal integration between
   memories of the past, awareness of identity and immediate sensations, and control of bodily
  movements (see F44.-), but arising as a consequence of an organic disorder
 Excludes:
dissociative [conversion] disorders, nonorganic or unspecified (F44.-)
F06.6 
F06.6
Organic emotionally labile [asthenic] disorder
Note:
A disorder characterized by emotional incontinence or lability, fatigability, and a variety of
unpleasant physical sensations (e.g. dizziness) and pains, but arising as a consequence of an
organic disorder.
Excludes:
somatoform disorders, nonorganic or unspecified (F45.-)
215
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F06.7 Mild cognitive disorder
     Note:
    A disorder characterized by impairment of memory, learning difficulties, and reduced ability to
   concentrate on a task for more than brief periods. There is often a marked feeling of mental
  fatigue when mental tasks are attempted, and new learning is found to be subjectively difficult
 even when objectively successful. None of these symptoms is so severe that a diagnosis of either
dementia (F00-F03) or delirium (F05.-) can be made. This diagnosis should be made only in
association with a specified physical disorder, and should not be made in the presence of any of
the mental or behavioural disorders classified to F10-F99. The disorder may precede,
accompany, or follow a wide variety of infections and physical disorders, both cerebral and
systemic, but direct evidence of cerebral involvement is not necessarily present. It can be
differentiated from postencephalitic syndrome (F07.1) and postconcussional syndrome (F07.2)
by its different etiology, more restricted range of generally milder symptoms, and usually shorter
duration.
F06.8 Other specified mental disorders due to brain damage and dysfunction and to physical
     disease
    Includes:
   Epileptic psychosis NOS
F06.9 Unspecified mental disorder due to brain damage and dysfunction and to physical disease
     Includes:
    Organic:
   •
    brain syndrome NOS
   •
    mental disorder NOS
F06.7
F07
Personality and behavioural disorders due to brain disease, damage and
dysfunction
Note:
Alteration of personality and behaviour can be a residual or concomitant disorder of brain
disease, damage or dysfunction.
F07.0 Organic personality disorder
     Note:
    A disorder characterized by a significant alteration of the habitual patterns of behaviour
   displayed by the subject premorbidly, involving the expression of emotions, needs and impulses.
  Impairment of cognitive and thought functions, and altered sexuality may also be part of the
 clinical picture.
Includes:
Organic:
•
 pseudopsychopathic personality
•
 pseudoretarded personality
Syndrome:
•
 frontal lobe
•
 limbic epilepsy personality
•
 lobotomy
•
 postleucotomy
Excludes:
enduring personality change after:
•
 catastrophic experience (F62.0)
•
 psychiatric illness (F62.1)
postconcussional syndrome (F07.2)
postencephalitic syndrome (F07.1)
specific personality disorder (F60.-)
F07.1 Postencephalitic syndrome
     Note:
    Residual nonspecific and variable behavioural change following recovery from either viral or
   bacterial encephalitis. The principal difference between this disorder and the organic personality
  disorders is that it is reversible.
 Excludes:
organic personality disorder (F07.0)
216
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F07.2
Postconcussional syndrome
Note:
A syndrome that occurs following head trauma (usually sufficiently severe to result in loss of
consciousness) and includes a number of disparate symptoms such as headache, dizziness,
fatigue, irritability, difficulty in concentration and performing mental tasks, impairment of
memory, insomnia, and reduced tolerance to stress, emotional excitement, or alcohol.
Includes:
Cognitive impairment with head injury
Post-traumatic brain syndrome, nonpsychotic
Postcontusional syndrome (encephalopathy)
Excludes:
current concussion, brain (S06.0)
F07.8 Other organic personality and behavioural disorders due to brain disease, damage and
     dysfunction
    Includes:
   Right hemispheric organic affective disorder
F07.9 
F09
Unspecified organic personality and behavioural disorder due to brain disease, damage and
dysfunction
Includes:
Cognitive impairment without head injury
Organic:
•
 personality syndrome
•
 psychosyndrome
F09
Unspecified organic or symptomatic mental disorder
Includes:
Excludes:
Psychosis:
•
organic NOS
•
symptomatic NOS
psychosis NOS (F29)
217
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F10
Mental and behavioural disorders due to psychoactive
substance use
(F10-F19)
Note:
Excludes:
F10
This block contains a wide variety of disorders that differ in severity and clinical form but that are all
attributable to the use of one or more psychoactive substances, which may or may not have been medically
prescribed. The third character of the code identifies the substance involved, and the fourth character specifies
the clinical state. The codes should be used, as required, for each substance specified, but it should be noted that
not all fourth-character codes are applicable to all substances.
Identification of the psychoactive substance should be based on as many sources of information as possible.
These include self-report data, analysis of blood and other body fluids, characteristic physical and psychological
symptoms, clinical signs and behaviour, and other evidence such as a drug being in the patient's possession or
reports from informed third parties. Many drug users take more than one type of psychoactive substance. The
main diagnosis should be classified, whenever possible, according to the substance or class of substances that
has caused or contributed most to the presenting clinical syndrome. Other diagnoses should be coded when
other psychoactive substances have been taken in intoxicating amounts (common fourth character .0) or to the
extent of causing harm (common fourth character .1), dependence (common fourth character .2) or other
disorders (common fourth character .3-.9).
Only in cases in which patterns of psychoactive substance-taking are chaotic and indiscriminate, or in which
the contributions of different psychoactive substances are inextricably mixed, should the diagnosis of disorders
resulting from multiple drug use (F19.-) be used.
abuse of non-dependence-producing substances (F55)
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol
F10.0 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol, acute intoxication
     Note:
    A condition that follows the administration of a psychoactive substance resulting in disturbances
   in level of consciousness, cognition, perception, affect or behaviour, or other psycho-
  physiological functions and responses. The disturbances are directly related to the acute
 pharmacological effects of the substance and resolve with time, with complete recovery, except
where tissue damage or other complications have arisen. Complications may include trauma,
inhalation of vomitus, delirium, coma, convulsions, and other medical complications. The nature
of these complications depends on the pharmacological class of substance and mode of
administration.
Includes:
"Bad trips" (drugs)
Acute drunkenness (in alcoholism)
Drunkenness NOS
Pathological intoxication
Trance and possession disorders in psychoactive substance intoxication
Excludes:
intoxication meaning poisoning (T36-T50)
F10.1 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol, harmful use
     Note:
    A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may be
   physical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administration of injected psychoactive
  substances) or mental (e.g. episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption of
 alcohol).
Includes:
Psychoactive substance abuse
218
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F10.2
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol, dependence syndrome
Note:
A cluster of behavioural, cognitive, and physiological phenomena that develop after repeated
substance use and that typically include a strong desire to take the drug, difficulties in controlling
its use, persisting in its use despite harmful consequences, a higher priority given to drug use
than to other activities and obligations, increased tolerance, and sometimes a physical
withdrawal state. The dependence syndrome may be present for a specific psychoactive
substance (e.g. tobacco, alcohol, or diazepam), for a class of substances (e.g. opioid drugs), or
for a wider range of pharmacologically different psychoactive substances.
Includes:
Chronic alcoholism
Dipsomania
Drug addiction
F10.3 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol, withdrawal state
     Note:
    A group of symptoms of variable clustering and severity occurring on absolute or relative
   withdrawal of a psychoactive substance after persistent use of that substance. The onset and
  course of the withdrawal state are time-limited and are related to the type of psychoactive
 substance and dose being used immediately before cessation or reduction of use. The withdrawal
state may be complicated by convulsions.
F10.4 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol, withdrawal state with delirium
     Note:
    A condition where the withdrawal state as defined in the common fourth character .3 is
   complicated by delirium as defined in F05.-. Convulsions may also occur. When organic factors
  are also considered to play a role in the etiology, the condition should be classified to F05.8.
 Includes:
Delirium tremens (alcohol-induced)
F10.5 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol, psychotic disorder
     Note:
    A cluster of psychotic phenomena that occur during or following psychoactive substance use but
   that are not explained on the basis of acute intoxication alone and do not form part of a
  withdrawal state. The disorder is characterized by hallucinations (typically auditory, but often in
 more than one sensory modality), perceptual distortions, delusions (often of a paranoid or
persecutory nature), psychomotor disturbances (excitement or stupor), and an abnormal affect,
which may range from intense fear to ecstasy. The sensorium is usually clear but some degree
of clouding of consciousness, though not severe confusion, may be present.
Includes:
Alcoholic:
•
 hallucinosis
•
 jealousy
•
 paranoia
•
 psychosis NOS
Excludes:
alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced residual and late-onset psychotic disorder
(F10-F19 with common fourth character .7)
F10.6 
F10.6
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol, amnesic syndrome
Note:
A syndrome associated with chronic prominent impairment of recent and remote memory.
Immediate recall is usually preserved and recent memory is characteristically more disturbed
than remote memory. Disturbances of time sense and ordering of events are usually evident, as
are difficulties in learning new material. Confabulation may be marked but is not invariably
present. Other cognitive functions are usually relatively well preserved and amnesic defects are
out of proportion to other disturbances.
Includes:
Amnestic disorder, alcohol- or drug-induced
Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome, alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced or
unspecified
Use additional code, (E51.2 †G32.8*) when associated with Wernicke's disease or syndrome.
 Excludes:
nonalcoholic Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome (F04)
219
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F10.7 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol, residual and late-onset psychotic
     disorder
    Note:
   A disorder in which alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced changes of cognition, affect,
  personality, or behaviour persist beyond the period during which a direct psychoactive
 substance-related effect might reasonably be assumed to be operating. Onset of the disorder
should be directly related to the use of the psychoactive substance. Cases in which initial onset
of the state occurs later than episode(s) of such substance use should be coded here only where
clear and strong evidence is available to attribute the state to the residual effect of the
psychoactive substance. Flashbacks may be distinguished from psychotic state partly by their
episodic nature, frequently of very short duration, and by their duplication of previous alcohol-
or other psychoactive substance-related experiences.
Includes:
Alcoholic dementia NOS
Chronic alcoholic brain syndrome
Dementia and other milder forms of persisting impairment of cognitive functions
Flashbacks
Late-onset psychoactive substance-induced psychotic disorder
Posthallucinogen perception disorder
Residual:
•
 affective disorder
•
 disorder of personality and behaviour
Excludes:
alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced:
•
 Korsakov's syndrome ((F10-F19 with common fourth character .6)
•
 psychotic state (F10-F19 with common fourth character .5)
F10.8 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol, other mental and behavioural
     disorders
F10.9 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol, unspecified mental and behavioural
     disorder
F10.7
F11
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of opioids
F11.0 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of opioids, acute intoxication
     Note:
    A condition that follows the administration of a psychoactive substance resulting in disturbances
   in level of consciousness, cognition, perception, affect or behaviour, or other psycho-
  physiological functions and responses. The disturbances are directly related to the acute
 pharmacological effects of the substance and resolve with time, with complete recovery, except
where tissue damage or other complications have arisen. Complications may include trauma,
inhalation of vomitus, delirium, coma, convulsions, and other medical complications. The nature
of these complications depends on the pharmacological class of substance and mode of
administration.
Includes:
"Bad trips" (drugs)
Pathological intoxication
Trance and possession disorders in psychoactive substance intoxication
Excludes:
intoxication meaning poisoning (T36-T50)
F11.1 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of opioids, harmful use
     Note:
    A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may be
   physical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administration of injected psychoactive
  substances) or mental (e.g. episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption of
 alcohol).
Includes:
Psychoactive substance abuse
F11.2 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of opioids, dependence syndrome
     Note:
    A cluster of behavioural, cognitive, and physiological phenomena that develop after repeated
   substance use and that typically include a strong desire to take the drug, difficulties in controlling
  its use, persisting in its use despite harmful consequences, a higher priority given to drug use
 than to other activities and obligations, increased tolerance, and sometimes a physical
withdrawal state. The dependence syndrome may be present for a specific psychoactive
substance (e.g. tobacco, alcohol, or diazepam), for a class of substances (e.g. opioid drugs), or
for a wider range of pharmacologically different psychoactive substances.
220
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
Includes:
Drug addiction
F11.3 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of opioids, withdrawal state
     Note:
    A group of symptoms of variable clustering and severity occurring on absolute or relative
   withdrawal of a psychoactive substance after persistent use of that substance. The onset and
  course of the withdrawal state are time-limited and are related to the type of psychoactive
 substance and dose being used immediately before cessation or reduction of use. The withdrawal
state may be complicated by convulsions.
F11.4 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of opioids, withdrawal state with delirium
     Note:
    A condition where the withdrawal state as defined in the common fourth character .3 is
   complicated by delirium as defined in F05.-. Convulsions may also occur. When organic factors
  are also considered to play a role in the etiology, the condition should be classified to F05.8.
F11.5 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of opioids, psychotic disorder
     Note:
    A cluster of psychotic phenomena that occur during or following psychoactive substance use but
   that are not explained on the basis of acute intoxication alone and do not form part of a
  withdrawal state. The disorder is characterized by hallucinations (typically auditory, but often in
 more than one sensory modality), perceptual distortions, delusions (often of a paranoid or
persecutory nature), psychomotor disturbances (excitement or stupor), and an abnormal affect,
which may range from intense fear to ecstasy. The sensorium is usually clear but some degree
of clouding of consciousness, though not severe confusion, may be present.
Excludes:
alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced residual and late-onset psychotic disorder
(F10-F19 with common fourth character .7)
F11.6 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of opioids, amnesic syndrome
     Includes:
    Amnestic disorder, alcohol- or drug-induced
   Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome, alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced or
  unspecified
 Use additional code, (E51.2 †G32.8*) when associated with Wernicke's disease or syndrome.
  Excludes:
 nonalcoholic Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome (F04)
F11.7 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of opioids, residual and late-onset psychotic
     disorder
    Note:
   A disorder in which alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced changes of cognition, affect,
  personality, or behaviour persist beyond the period during which a direct psychoactive
 substance-related effect might reasonably be assumed to be operating. Onset of the disorder
should be directly related to the use of the psychoactive substance. Cases in which initial onset
of the state occurs later than episode(s) of such substance use should be coded here only where
clear and strong evidence is available to attribute the state to the residual effect of the
psychoactive substance. Flashbacks may be distinguished from psychotic state partly by their
episodic nature, frequently of very short duration, and by their duplication of previous alcohol-
or other psychoactive substance-related experiences.
Includes:
Dementia and other milder forms of persisting impairment of cognitive functions
Flashbacks
Late-onset psychoactive substance-induced psychotic disorder
Posthallucinogen perception disorder
Residual:
•
 affective disorder
•
 disorder of personality and behaviour
Excludes:
alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced:
•
 Korsakov's syndrome (F10-F19 with common fourth character .6)
•
 psychotic state (F10-F19 with common fourth character .5)
F11.8 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of opioids, other mental and behavioural
     disorders
F11.9 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of opioids, unspecified mental and behavioural
     disorder
F11.9
221
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F12
F12
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cannabinoids
F12.0 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cannabinoids, acute intoxication
     Note:
    A condition that follows the administration of a psychoactive substance resulting in disturbances
   in level of consciousness, cognition, perception, affect or behaviour, or other psycho-
  physiological functions and responses. The disturbances are directly related to the acute
 pharmacological effects of the substance and resolve with time, with complete recovery, except
where tissue damage or other complications have arisen. Complications may include trauma,
inhalation of vomitus, delirium, coma, convulsions, and other medical complications. The nature
of these complications depends on the pharmacological class of substance and mode of
administration.
Includes:
Pathological intoxication
Trance and possession disorders in psychoactive substance intoxication
Excludes:
intoxication meaning poisoning (T36-T50)
F12.1 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cannabinoids, harmful use
     Note:
    A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may be
   physical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administration of injected psychoactive
  substances) or mental (e.g. episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption of
 alcohol).
Includes:
Psychoactive substance abuse
F12.2 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cannabinoids, dependence syndrome
     Note:
    A cluster of behavioural, cognitive, and physiological phenomena that develop after repeated
   substance use and that typically include a strong desire to take the drug, difficulties in controlling
  its use, persisting in its use despite harmful consequences, a higher priority given to drug use
 than to other activities and obligations, increased tolerance, and sometimes a physical
withdrawal state. The dependence syndrome may be present for a specific psychoactive
substance (e.g. tobacco, alcohol, or diazepam), for a class of substances (e.g. opioid drugs), or
for a wider range of pharmacologically different psychoactive substances.
Includes:
Drug addiction
F12.3 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cannabinoids, withdrawal state
     Note:
    A group of symptoms of variable clustering and severity occurring on absolute or relative
   withdrawal of a psychoactive substance after persistent use of that substance. The onset and
  course of the withdrawal state are time-limited and are related to the type of psychoactive
 substance and dose being used immediately before cessation or reduction of use. The withdrawal
state may be complicated by convulsions.
F12.4 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cannabinoids, withdrawal state with delirium
     Note:
    A condition where the withdrawal state as defined in the common fourth character .3 is
   complicated by delirium as defined in F05.-. Convulsions may also occur. When organic factors
  are also considered to play a role in the etiology, the condition should be classified to F05.8.
F12.5 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cannabinoids, psychotic disorder
     Note:
    A cluster of psychotic phenomena that occur during or following psychoactive substance use but
   that are not explained on the basis of acute intoxication alone and do not form part of a
  withdrawal state. The disorder is characterized by hallucinations (typically auditory, but often in
 more than one sensory modality), perceptual distortions, delusions (often of a paranoid or
persecutory nature), psychomotor disturbances (excitement or stupor), and an abnormal affect,
which may range from intense fear to ecstasy. The sensorium is usually clear but some degree
of clouding of consciousness, though not severe confusion, may be present.
Excludes:
alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced residual and late-onset psychotic disorder
(F10-F19 with common fourth character .7)
222
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F12.6
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cannabinoids, amnesic syndrome
Note:
A syndrome associated with chronic prominent impairment of recent and remote memory.
Immediate recall is usually preserved and recent memory is characteristically more disturbed
than remote memory. Disturbances of time sense and ordering of events are usually evident, as
are difficulties in learning new material. Confabulation may be marked but is not invariably
present. Other cognitive functions are usually relatively well preserved and amnesic defects are
out of proportion to other disturbances.
Includes:
Amnestic disorder, alcohol- or drug-induced
Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome, alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced or
unspecified
Use additional code, (E51.2 †G32.8*) when associated with Wernicke's disease or syndrome.
Excludes:
nonalcoholic Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome (F04)
F12.7 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cannabinoids, residual and late-onset
     psychotic disorder
    Note:
   A disorder in which alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced changes of cognition, affect,
  personality, or behaviour persist beyond the period during which a direct psychoactive
 substance-related effect might reasonably be assumed to be operating. Onset of the disorder
should be directly related to the use of the psychoactive substance. Cases in which initial onset
of the state occurs later than episode(s) of such substance use should be coded here only where
clear and strong evidence is available to attribute the state to the residual effect of the
psychoactive substance. Flashbacks may be distinguished from psychotic state partly by their
episodic nature, frequently of very short duration, and by their duplication of previous alcohol-
or other psychoactive substance-related experiences.
Includes:
Dementia and other milder forms of persisting impairment of cognitive functions
Flashbacks
Late-onset psychoactive substance-induced psychotic disorder
Posthallucinogen perception disorder
Residual:
•
 affective disorder
•
 disorder of personality and behaviour
Excludes:
alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced:
•
 Korsakov's syndrome (F10-F19 with common fourth character .6)
•
 psychotic state (F10-F19 with common fourth character .5)
F12.8 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cannabinoids, other mental and behavioural
     disorders
F12.9 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cannabinoids, unspecified mental and
     behavioural disorder
F13 
F13.0
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of sedatives or hypnotics
F13.0
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of sedatives or hypnotics, acute intoxication
Note:
A condition that follows the administration of a psychoactive substance resulting in disturbances
in level of consciousness, cognition, perception, affect or behaviour, or other psycho-
physiological functions and responses. The disturbances are directly related to the acute
pharmacological effects of the substance and resolve with time, with complete recovery, except
where tissue damage or other complications have arisen. Complications may include trauma,
inhalation of vomitus, delirium, coma, convulsions, and other medical complications. The nature
of these complications depends on the pharmacological class of substance and mode of
administration.
Includes:
"Bad trips" (drugs)
Pathological intoxication
Trance and possession disorders in psychoactive substance intoxication
Excludes:
intoxication meaning poisoning (T36-T50)
223
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F13.1 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of sedatives or hypnotics, harmful use
     Note:
    A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may be
   physical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administration of injected psychoactive
  substances) or mental (e.g. episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption of
 alcohol).
Includes:
Psychoactive substance abuse
F13.2 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of sedatives or hypnotics, dependence
     syndrome
    Note:
   A cluster of behavioural, cognitive, and physiological phenomena that develop after repeated
  substance use and that typically include a strong desire to take the drug, difficulties in controlling
 its use, persisting in its use despite harmful consequences, a higher priority given to drug use
than to other activities and obligations, increased tolerance, and sometimes a physical
withdrawal state. The dependence syndrome may be present for a specific psychoactive
substance (e.g. tobacco, alcohol, or diazepam), for a class of substances (e.g. opioid drugs), or
for a wider range of pharmacologically different psychoactive substances.
Includes:
Drug addiction
F13.3 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of sedatives or hypnotics, withdrawal state
     Note:
    A group of symptoms of variable clustering and severity occurring on absolute or relative
   withdrawal of a psychoactive substance after persistent use of that substance. The onset and
  course of the withdrawal state are time-limited and are related to the type of psychoactive
 substance and dose being used immediately before cessation or reduction of use. The withdrawal
state may be complicated by convulsions.
F13.4 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of sedatives or hypnotics, withdrawal state with
     delirium
    Note:
   A condition where the withdrawal state as defined in the common fourth character .3 is
  complicated by delirium as defined in F05.-. Convulsions may also occur. When organic factors
 are also considered to play a role in the etiology, the condition should be classified to F05.8.
F13.5 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of sedatives or hypnotics, psychotic disorder
     Note:
    A cluster of psychotic phenomena that occur during or following psychoactive substance use but
   that are not explained on the basis of acute intoxication alone and do not form part of a
  withdrawal state. The disorder is characterized by hallucinations (typically auditory, but often in
 more than one sensory modality), perceptual distortions, delusions (often of a paranoid or
persecutory nature), psychomotor disturbances (excitement or stupor), and an abnormal affect,
which may range from intense fear to ecstasy. The sensorium is usually clear but some degree
of clouding of consciousness, though not severe confusion, may be present.
Excludes:
alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced residual and late-onset psychotic disorder
(F10-F19 with common fourth character .7)
F13.6 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of sedatives or hypnotics, amnesic syndrome
     Note:
    A syndrome associated with chronic prominent impairment of recent and remote memory.
   Immediate recall is usually preserved and recent memory is characteristically more disturbed
  than remote memory. Disturbances of time sense and ordering of events are usually evident, as
 are difficulties in learning new material. Confabulation may be marked but is not invariably
present. Other cognitive functions are usually relatively well preserved and amnesic defects are
out of proportion to other disturbances.
Includes:
Amnestic disorder, alcohol- or drug-induced
Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome, alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced or
unspecified
Use additional code, (E51.2 †G32.8*) when associated with Wernicke's disease or syndrome.
 Excludes:
nonalcoholic Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome (F04)
F13.1
224
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F13.7
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of sedatives or hypnotics, residual and late-
onset psychotic disorder
Note:
A disorder in which alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced changes of cognition, affect,
personality, or behaviour persist beyond the period during which a direct psychoactive
substance-related effect might reasonably be assumed to be operating. Onset of the disorder
should be directly related to the use of the psychoactive substance. Cases in which initial onset
of the state occurs later than episode(s) of such substance use should be coded here only where
clear and strong evidence is available to attribute the state to the residual effect of the
psychoactive substance. Flashbacks may be distinguished from psychotic state partly by their
episodic nature, frequently of very short duration, and by their duplication of previous alcohol-
or other psychoactive substance-related experiences.
Includes:
Dementia and other milder forms of persisting impairment of cognitive functions
Flashbacks
Late-onset psychoactive substance-induced psychotic disorder
Posthallucinogen perception disorder
Residual:
•
affective disorder
•
disorder of personality and behaviour
Excludes:
alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced:
•
Korsakov's syndrome (F10-F19 with common fourth character .6)
•
psychotic state (F10-F19 with common fourth character .5)
F13.8 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of sedatives or hypnotics, other mental and
     behavioural disorders
F13.9 
F14.2
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of sedatives or hypnotics, unspecified mental
and behavioural disorder
F14
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cocaine
F14.0 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cocaine, acute intoxication
     Note:
    A condition that follows the administration of a psychoactive substance resulting in disturbances
   in level of consciousness, cognition, perception, affect or behaviour, or other psycho-
  physiological functions and responses. The disturbances are directly related to the acute
 pharmacological effects of the substance and resolve with time, with complete recovery, except
where tissue damage or other complications have arisen. Complications may include trauma,
inhalation of vomitus, delirium, coma, convulsions, and other medical complications. The nature
of these complications depends on the pharmacological class of substance and mode of
administration.
Includes:
"Bad trips" (drugs)
Pathological intoxication
Trance and possession disorders in psychoactive substance intoxication
Excludes:
intoxication meaning poisoning (T36-T50)
F14.1 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cocaine, harmful use
     Note:
    A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may be
   physical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administration of injected psychoactive
  substances) or mental (e.g. episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption of
 alcohol).
Includes:
Psychoactive substance abuse
F14.2 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cocaine, dependence syndrome
     Note:
    A cluster of behavioural, cognitive, and physiological phenomena that develop after repeated
   substance use and that typically include a strong desire to take the drug, difficulties in controlling
  its use, persisting in its use despite harmful consequences, a higher priority given to drug use
 than to other activities and obligations, increased tolerance, and sometimes a physical
withdrawal state. The dependence syndrome may be present for a specific psychoactive
substance (e.g. tobacco, alcohol, or diazepam), for a class of substances (e.g. opioid drugs), or
for a wider range of pharmacologically different psychoactive substances.
Includes:
Drug addiction
225
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F14.3 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cocaine, withdrawal state
     Note:
    A group of symptoms of variable clustering and severity occurring on absolute or relative
   withdrawal of a psychoactive substance after persistent use of that substance. The onset and
  course of the withdrawal state are time-limited and are related to the type of psychoactive
 substance and dose being used immediately before cessation or reduction of use. The withdrawal
state may be complicated by convulsions.
F14.4 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cocaine, withdrawal state with delirium
     Note:
    A condition where the withdrawal state as defined in the common fourth character .3 is
   complicated by delirium as defined in F05.-. Convulsions may also occur. When organic factors
  are also considered to play a role in the etiology, the condition should be classified to F05.8.
F14.5 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cocaine, psychotic disorder
     Note:
    A cluster of psychotic phenomena that occur during or following psychoactive substance use but
   that are not explained on the basis of acute intoxication alone and do not form part of a
  withdrawal state. The disorder is characterized by hallucinations (typically auditory, but often in
 more than one sensory modality), perceptual distortions, delusions (often of a paranoid or
persecutory nature), psychomotor disturbances (excitement or stupor), and an abnormal affect,
which may range from intense fear to ecstasy. The sensorium is usually clear but some degree
of clouding of consciousness, though not severe confusion, may be present.
Excludes:
alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced residual and late-onset psychotic disorder
(F10-F19 with common fourth character .7)
F14.6 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cocaine, amnesic syndrome
     Note:
    A syndrome associated with chronic prominent impairment of recent and remote memory.
   Immediate recall is usually preserved and recent memory is characteristically more disturbed
  than remote memory. Disturbances of time sense and ordering of events are usually evident, as
 are difficulties in learning new material. Confabulation may be marked but is not invariably
present. Other cognitive functions are usually relatively well preserved and amnesic defects are
out of proportion to other disturbances.
Includes:
Amnestic disorder, alcohol- or drug-induced
Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome, alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced or
unspecified
Use additional code, (E51.2 †G32.8*) when associated with Wernicke's disease or syndrome.
 Excludes:
nonalcoholic Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome (F04)
F14.7 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cocaine, residual and late-onset psychotic
     disorder
    Note:
   A disorder in which alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced changes of cognition, affect,
  personality, or behaviour persist beyond the period during which a direct psychoactive
 substance-related effect might reasonably be assumed to be operating. Onset of the disorder
should be directly related to the use of the psychoactive substance. Cases in which initial onset
of the state occurs later than episode(s) of such substance use should be coded here only where
clear and strong evidence is available to attribute the state to the residual effect of the
psychoactive substance. Flashbacks may be distinguished from psychotic state partly by their
episodic nature, frequently of very short duration, and by their duplication of previous alcohol-
or other psychoactive substance-related experiences.
Includes:
Dementia and other milder forms of persisting impairment of cognitive functions
Flashbacks
Late-onset psychoactive substance-induced psychotic disorder
Posthallucinogen perception disorder
Residual:
•
 affective disorder
•
 disorder of personality and behaviour
Excludes:
alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced:
•
 Korsakov's syndrome (F10-F19 with common fourth character .6)
•
 psychotic state (F10-F19 with common fourth character .5)
F14.8 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cocaine, other mental and behavioural
     disorders
F14.3
226
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F14.9
F15
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of cocaine, unspecified mental and behavioural
disorder
F15.4
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of other stimulants, including
caffeine
F15.0 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of other stimulants including caffeine, acute
     intoxication
    Note:
   A condition that follows the administration of a psychoactive substance resulting in disturbances
  in level of consciousness, cognition, perception, affect or behaviour, or other psycho-
 physiological functions and responses. The disturbances are directly related to the acute
pharmacological effects of the substance and resolve with time, with complete recovery, except
where tissue damage or other complications have arisen. Complications may include trauma,
inhalation of vomitus, delirium, coma, convulsions, and other medical complications. The nature
of these complications depends on the pharmacological class of substance and mode of
administration.
Includes:
"Bad trips" (drugs)
Pathological intoxication
Trance and possession disorders in psychoactive substance intoxication
Excludes:
intoxication meaning poisoning (T36-T50)
F15.1 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of other stimulants including caffeine, harmful
     use
    Note:
   A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may be
  physical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administration of injected psychoactive
 substances) or mental (e.g. episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption of
alcohol).
Includes:
Psychoactive substance abuse
F15.2 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of other stimulants including caffeine,
     dependence syndrome
    Note:
   A cluster of behavioural, cognitive, and physiological phenomena that develop after repeated
  substance use and that typically include a strong desire to take the drug, difficulties in controlling
 its use, persisting in its use despite harmful consequences, a higher priority given to drug use
than to other activities and obligations, increased tolerance, and sometimes a physical
withdrawal state. The dependence syndrome may be present for a specific psychoactive
substance (e.g. tobacco, alcohol, or diazepam), for a class of substances (e.g. opioid drugs), or
for a wider range of pharmacologically different psychoactive substances.
Includes:
Drug addiction
F15.3 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of other stimulants including caffeine,
     withdrawal state
    Note:
   A group of symptoms of variable clustering and severity occurring on absolute or relative
  withdrawal of a psychoactive substance after persistent use of that substance. The onset and
 course of the withdrawal state are time-limited and are related to the type of psychoactive
substance and dose being used immediately before cessation or reduction of use. The withdrawal
state may be complicated by convulsions.
F15.4 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of other stimulants including caffeine,
     withdrawal state with delirium
    Note:
   A condition where the withdrawal state as defined in the common fourth character .3 is
  complicated by delirium as defined in F05.-. Convulsions may also occur. When organic factors
 are also considered to play a role in the etiology, the condition should be classified to F05.8.
227
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F15.5 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of other stimulants including caffeine, psychotic
     disorder
    Note:
   A cluster of psychotic phenomena that occur during or following psychoactive substance use but
  that are not explained on the basis of acute intoxication alone and do not form part of a
 withdrawal state. The disorder is characterized by hallucinations (typically auditory, but often in
more than one sensory modality), perceptual distortions, delusions (often of a paranoid or
persecutory nature), psychomotor disturbances (excitement or stupor), and an abnormal affect,
which may range from intense fear to ecstasy. The sensorium is usually clear but some degree
of clouding of consciousness, though not severe confusion, may be present.
Excludes:
alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced residual and late-onset psychotic disorder
(F10-F19 with common fourth character .7)
F15.6 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of other stimulants including caffeine, amnesic
     syndrome
    Note:
   A syndrome associated with chronic prominent impairment of recent and remote memory.
  Immediate recall is usually preserved and recent memory is characteristically more disturbed
 than remote memory. Disturbances of time sense and ordering of events are usually evident, as
are difficulties in learning new material. Confabulation may be marked but is not invariably
present. Other cognitive functions are usually relatively well preserved and amnesic defects are
out of proportion to other disturbances.
Includes:
Amnestic disorder, alcohol- or drug-induced
Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome, alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced or
unspecified
Use additional code, (E51.2 †G32.8*) when associated with Wernicke's disease or syndrome.
 Excludes:
nonalcoholic Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome (F04)
F15.7 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of other stimulants including caffeine, residual
     and late-onset psychotic disorder
    Note:
   A disorder in which alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced changes of cognition, affect,
  personality, or behaviour persist beyond the period during which a direct psychoactive
 substance-related effect might reasonably be assumed to be operating. Onset of the disorder
should be directly related to the use of the psychoactive substance. Cases in which initial onset
of the state occurs later than episode(s) of such substance use should be coded here only where
clear and strong evidence is available to attribute the state to the residual effect of the
psychoactive substance. Flashbacks may be distinguished from psychotic state partly by their
episodic nature, frequently of very short duration, and by their duplication of previous alcohol-
or other psychoactive substance-related experiences.
Includes:
Dementia and other milder forms of persisting impairment of cognitive functions
Flashbacks
Late-onset psychoactive substance-induced psychotic disorder
Posthallucinogen perception disorder
Residual:
•
 affective disorder
•
 disorder of personality and behaviour
Excludes:
alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced:
•
 Korsakov's syndrome (F10-F19 with common fourth character .6)
•
 psychotic state (F10-F19 with common fourth character .5)
F15.8 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of other stimulants including caffeine, other
     mental and behavioural disorders
F15.9 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of other stimulants including caffeine,
     unspecified mental and behavioural disorder
F15.5
228
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F16
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of hallucinogens
F16.0 F16.1 Mental and behavioural disorders due to u se of hallucinogens, harmful use
           Note:
          A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may be
         physical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administration of injected psychoactive
        substances) or mental (e.g. episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption of
       alcohol).
      Includes:
     Psychoactive substance abuse
F16.2 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of hallucinogens, dependence syndrome
     Note:
    A cluster of behavioural, cognitive, and physiological phenomena that develop after repeated
   substance use and that typically include a strong desire to take the drug, difficulties in controlling
  its use, persisting in its use despite harmful consequences, a higher priority given to drug use
 than to other activities and obligations, increased tolerance, and sometimes a physical
withdrawal state. The dependence syndrome may be present for a specific psychoactive
substance (e.g. tobacco, alcohol, or diazepam), for a class of substances (e.g. opioid drugs), or
for a wider range of pharmacologically different psychoactive substances.
Includes:
Drug addiction
F16.3 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of hallucinogens, withdrawal state
     Note:
    A group of symptoms of variable clustering and severity occurring on absolute or relative
   withdrawal of a psychoactive substance after persistent use of that substance. The onset and
  course of the withdrawal state are time-limited and are related to the type of psychoactive
 substance and dose being used immediately before cessation or reduction of use. The withdrawal
state may be complicated by convulsions.
F16.4 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of hallucinogens, withdrawal state with delirium
     Note:
    A condition where the withdrawal state as defined in the common fourth character .3 is
   complicated by delirium as defined in F05.-. Convulsions may also occur. When organic factors
  are also considered to play a role in the etiology, the condition should be classified to F05.8.
F16.5 
F16.5
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of hallucinogens, acute intoxication
Note:
A condition that follows the administration of a psychoactive substance resulting in disturbances
in level of consciousness, cognition, perception, affect or behaviour, or other psycho-
physiological functions and responses. The disturbances are directly related to the acute
pharmacological effects of the substance and resolve with time, with complete recovery, except
where tissue damage or other complications have arisen. Complications may include trauma,
inhalation of vomitus, delirium, coma, convulsions, and other medical complications. The nature
of these complications depends on the pharmacological class of substance and mode of
administration.
Includes:
"Bad trips" (drugs)
Pathological intoxication
Trance and possession disorders in psychoactive substance intoxication
Excludes:
intoxication meaning poisoning (T36-T50)
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of hallucinogens, psychotic disorder
Note:
A cluster of psychotic phenomena that occur during or following psychoactive substance use but
that are not explained on the basis of acute intoxication alone and do not form part of a
withdrawal state. The disorder is characterized by hallucinations (typically auditory, but often in
more than one sensory modality), perceptual distortions, delusions (often of a paranoid or
persecutory nature), psychomotor disturbances (excitement or stupor), and an abnormal affect,
which may range from intense fear to ecstasy. The sensorium is usually clear but some degree
of clouding of consciousness, though not severe confusion, may be present.
Excludes:
alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced residual and late-onset psychotic disorder
(F10-F19 with common fourth character .7)
229
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F16.6 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of hallucinogens, amnesic syndrome
     Note:
    A syndrome associated with chronic prominent impairment of recent and remote memory.
   Immediate recall is usually preserved and recent memory is characteristically more disturbed
  than remote memory. Disturbances of time sense and ordering of events are usually evident, as
 are difficulties in learning new material. Confabulation may be marked but is not invariably
present. Other cognitive functions are usually relatively well preserved and amnesic defects are
out of proportion to other disturbances.
Includes:
Amnestic disorder, alcohol- or drug-induced
Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome, alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced or
unspecified
Use additional code, (E51.2 †G32.8*) when associated with Wernicke's disease or syndrome.
 Excludes:
nonalcoholic Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome (F04)
F16.7 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of hallucinogens, residual and late-onset
     psychotic disorder
    Note:
   A disorder in which alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced changes of cognition, affect,
  personality, or behaviour persist beyond the period during which a direct psychoactive
 substance-related effect might reasonably be assumed to be operating. Onset of the disorder
should be directly related to the use of the psychoactive substance. Cases in which initial onset
of the state occurs later than episode(s) of such substance use should be coded here only where
clear and strong evidence is available to attribute the state to the residual effect of the
psychoactive substance. Flashbacks may be distinguished from psychotic state partly by their
episodic nature, frequently of very short duration, and by their duplication of previous alcohol-
or other psychoactive substance-related experiences.
Includes:
Dementia and other milder forms of persisting impairment of cognitive functions
Flashbacks
Late-onset psychoactive substance-induced psychotic disorder
Posthallucinogen perception disorder
Residual:
•
 affective disorder
•
 disorder of personality and behaviour
Excludes:
alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced:
•
 Korsakov's syndrome (F10-F19 with common fourth character .6)
•
 psychotic state (F10-F19 with common fourth character .5)
F16.8 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of hallucinogens, other mental and behavioural
     disorders
F16.9 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of hallucinogens, unspecified mental and
     behavioural disorder
F16.6
F17
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco
Excludes:
F17.0
230
history of tobacco dependence (Z86.42)
tobacco use during pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O99.3--)
tobacco use NOS (Z72.0)
toxic effect of nicotine (T65.2-)
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco, acute intoxication
Note:
A condition that follows the administration of a psychoactive substance resulting in disturbances
in level of consciousness, cognition, perception, affect or behaviour, or other psycho-
physiological functions and responses. The disturbances are directly related to the acute
pharmacological effects of the substance and resolve with time, with complete recovery, except
where tissue damage or other complications have arisen. Complications may include trauma,
inhalation of vomitus, delirium, coma, convulsions, and other medical complications. The nature
of these complications depends on the pharmacological class of substance and mode of
administration.
Includes:
"Bad trips" (drugs)
Pathological intoxication
Excludes:
intoxication meaning poisoning (T36-T50)
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F17.1
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco, harmful use
Note:
A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may be
physical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administration of injected psychoactive
substances) or mental (e.g. episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption of
alcohol).
Includes:
Psychoactive substance abuse
F17.2 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco, dependence syndrome
     Note:
    A cluster of behavioural, cognitive, and physiological phenomena that develop after repeated
   substance use and that typically include a strong desire to take the drug, difficulties in controlling
  its use, persisting in its use despite harmful consequences, a higher priority given to drug use
 than to other activities and obligations, increased tolerance, and sometimes a physical
withdrawal state. The dependence syndrome may be present for a specific psychoactive
substance (e.g. tobacco, alcohol, or diazepam), for a class of substances (e.g. opioid drugs), or
for a wider range of pharmacologically different psychoactive substances.
Includes:
Drug addiction
F17.3 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco, withdrawal state
     Note:
    A group of symptoms of variable clustering and severity occurring on absolute or relative
   withdrawal of a psychoactive substance after persistent use of that substance. The onset and
  course of the withdrawal state are time-limited and are related to the type of psychoactive
 substance and dose being used immediately before cessation or reduction of use. The withdrawal
state may be complicated by convulsions.
F17.4 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco, withdrawal state with delirium
     Note:
    A condition where the withdrawal state as defined in the common fourth character .3 is
   complicated by delirium as defined in F05.-. Convulsions may also occur. When organic factors
  are also considered to play a role in the etiology, the condition should be classified to F05.8.
F17.5 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco, psychotic disorder
     Note:
    A cluster of psychotic phenomena that occur during or following psychoactive substance use but
   that are not explained on the basis of acute intoxication alone and do not form part of a
  withdrawal state. The disorder is characterized by hallucinations (typically auditory, but often in
 more than one sensory modality), perceptual distortions, delusions (often of a paranoid or
persecutory nature), psychomotor disturbances (excitement or stupor), and an abnormal affect,
which may range from intense fear to ecstasy. The sensorium is usually clear but some degree
of clouding of consciousness, though not severe confusion, may be present.
Excludes:
alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced residual and late-onset psychotic disorder
(F10-F19 with common fourth character .7)
F17.6 
F17.6
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco, amnesic syndrome
Note:
A syndrome associated with chronic prominent impairment of recent and remote memory.
Immediate recall is usually preserved and recent memory is characteristically more disturbed
than remote memory. Disturbances of time sense and ordering of events are usually evident, as
are difficulties in learning new material. Confabulation may be marked but is not invariably
present. Other cognitive functions are usually relatively well preserved and amnesic defects are
out of proportion to other disturbances.
Includes:
Amnestic disorder, alcohol- or drug-induced
Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome, alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced or
unspecified
Use additional code, (E51.2 †G32.8*) when associated with Wernicke's disease or syndrome.
 Excludes:
nonalcoholic Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome (F04)
231
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F17.7 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco, residual and late-onset psychotic
     disorder
    Note:
   A disorder in which alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced changes of cognition, affect,
  personality, or behaviour persist beyond the period during which a direct psychoactive
 substance-related effect might reasonably be assumed to be operating. Onset of the disorder
should be directly related to the use of the psychoactive substance. Cases in which initial onset
of the state occurs later than episode(s) of such substance use should be coded here only where
clear and strong evidence is available to attribute the state to the residual effect of the
psychoactive substance. Flashbacks may be distinguished from psychotic state partly by their
episodic nature, frequently of very short duration, and by their duplication of previous alcohol-
or other psychoactive substance-related experiences.
Includes:
Dementia and other milder forms of persisting impairment of cognitive functions
Flashbacks
Late-onset psychoactive substance-induced psychotic disorder
Posthallucinogen perception disorder
Residual:
•
 affective disorder
•
 disorder of personality and behaviour
Excludes:
alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced:
•
 Korsakov's syndrome (F10-F19 with common fourth character .6)
•
 psychotic state (F10-F19 with common fourth character .5)
F17.8 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco, other mental and behavioural
     disorders
F17.9 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of tobacco, unspecified mental and behavioural
     disorder
F17.7
F18
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of volatile solvents
F18.0 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of volatile solvents, acute intoxication
     Note:
    A condition that follows the administration of a psychoactive substance resulting in disturbances
   in level of consciousness, cognition, perception, affect or behaviour, or other psycho-
  physiological functions and responses. The disturbances are directly related to the acute
 pharmacological effects of the substance and resolve with time, with complete recovery, except
where tissue damage or other complications have arisen. Complications may include trauma,
inhalation of vomitus, delirium, coma, convulsions, and other medical complications. The nature
of these complications depends on the pharmacological class of substance and mode of
administration.
Includes:
"Bad trips" (drugs)
Pathological intoxication
Trance and possession disorders in psychoactive substance intoxication
Excludes:
intoxication meaning poisoning (T36-T50)
F18.1 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of volatile solvents, harmful use
     Note:
    A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may be
   physical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administration of injected psychoactive
  substances) or mental (e.g. episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption of
 alcohol).
Includes:
Psychoactive substance abuse
F18.2 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of volatile solvents, dependence syndrome
     Note:
    A cluster of behavioural, cognitive, and physiological phenomena that develop after repeated
   substance use and that typically include a strong desire to take the drug, difficulties in controlling
  its use, persisting in its use despite harmful consequences, a higher priority given to drug use
 than to other activities and obligations, increased tolerance, and sometimes a physical
withdrawal state. The dependence syndrome may be present for a specific psychoactive
substance (e.g. tobacco, alcohol, or diazepam), for a class of substances (e.g. opioid drugs), or
for a wider range of pharmacologically different psychoactive substances.
Includes:
Drug addiction
232
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F18.3
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of volatile solvents, withdrawal state
Note:
A group of symptoms of variable clustering and severity occurring on absolute or relative
withdrawal of a psychoactive substance after persistent use of that substance. The onset and
course of the withdrawal state are time-limited and are related to the type of psychoactive
substance and dose being used immediately before cessation or reduction of use. The withdrawal
state may be complicated by convulsions.
F18.4 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of volatile solvents, withdrawal state with
     delirium
    Note:
   A condition where the withdrawal state as defined in the common fourth character .3 is
  complicated by delirium as defined in F05.-. Convulsions may also occur. When organic factors
 are also considered to play a role in the etiology, the condition should be classified to F05.8.
F18.5 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of volatile solvents, psychotic disorder
     Note:
    A cluster of psychotic phenomena that occur during or following psychoactive substance use but
   that are not explained on the basis of acute intoxication alone and do not form part of a
  withdrawal state. The disorder is characterized by hallucinations (typically auditory, but often in
 more than one sensory modality), perceptual distortions, delusions (often of a paranoid or
persecutory nature), psychomotor disturbances (excitement or stupor), and an abnormal affect,
which may range from intense fear to ecstasy. The sensorium is usually clear but some degree
of clouding of consciousness, though not severe confusion, may be present.
Excludes:
alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced residual and late-onset psychotic disorder
(F10-F19 with common fourth character .7)
F18.6 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of volatile solvents, amnesic syndrome
     Note:
    A syndrome associated with chronic prominent impairment of recent and remote memory.
   Immediate recall is usually preserved and recent memory is characteristically more disturbed
  than remote memory. Disturbances of time sense and ordering of events are usually evident, as
 are difficulties in learning new material. Confabulation may be marked but is not invariably
present. Other cognitive functions are usually relatively well preserved and amnesic defects are
out of proportion to other disturbances.
Includes:
Amnestic disorder, alcohol- or drug-induced
Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome, alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced or
unspecified
Use additional code, (E51.2 †G32.8*) when associated with Wernicke's disease or syndrome.
 Excludes:
nonalcoholic Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome (F04)
F18.7 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of volatile solvents, residual and late-onset
     psychotic disorder
    Note:
   A disorder in which alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced changes of cognition, affect,
  personality, or behaviour persist beyond the period during which a direct psychoactive
 substance-related effect might reasonably be assumed to be operating. Onset of the disorder
should be directly related to the use of the psychoactive substance. Cases in which initial onset
of the state occurs later than episode(s) of such substance use should be coded here only where
clear and strong evidence is available to attribute the state to the residual effect of the
psychoactive substance. Flashbacks may be distinguished from psychotic state partly by their
episodic nature, frequently of very short duration, and by their duplication of previous alcohol-
or other psychoactive substance-related experiences.
Includes:
Dementia and other milder forms of persisting impairment of cognitive functions
Flashbacks
Late-onset psychoactive substance-induced psychotic disorder
Posthallucinogen perception disorder
Residual:
•
 affective disorder
•
 disorder of personality and behaviour
Excludes:
alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced:
•
 Korsakov's syndrome (F10-F19 with common fourth character .6)
•
 psychotic state (F10-F19 with common fourth character .5)
F18.8 
F18.8
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of volatile solvents, other mental and
behavioural disorders
233
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F18.9
F18.9
F19
Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of volatile solvents, unspecified mental and
behavioural disorder
Mental and behavioural disorders due to multiple drug use and use of other
psychoactive substances
Note:
Includes:
This category should be used when two or more psychoactive substances are known to be
involved, but it is impossible to assess which substance is contributing most to the disorders. It
should also be used when the exact identity of some or even all the psychoactive substances
being used is uncertain or unknown, since many multiple drug users themselves often do not
know the details of what they are taking.
misuse of drugs NOS
F19.0 Mental and behavioural disorders due to multiple drug use and use of psychoactive
     substances, acute intoxication
    Note:
   A condition that follows the administration of a psychoactive substance resulting in disturbances
  in level of consciousness, cognition, perception, affect or behaviour, or other psycho-
 physiological functions and responses. The disturbances are directly related to the acute
pharmacological effects of the substance and resolve with time, with complete recovery, except
where tissue damage or other complications have arisen. Complications may include trauma,
inhalation of vomitus, delirium, coma, convulsions, and other medical complications. The nature
of these complications depends on the pharmacological class of substance and mode of
administration.
Includes:
"Bad trips" (drugs)
Acute drunkenness in alcoholism
Drunkenness NOS
Pathological intoxication
Trance and possession disorders in psychoactive substance intoxication
Excludes:
intoxication meaning poisoning (T36-T50)
F19.1 Mental and behavioural disorders due to multiple drug use and use of psychoactive
     substances, harmful use
    Note:
   A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may be
  physical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administration of injected psychoactive
 substances) or mental (e.g. episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption of
alcohol).
Includes:
Psychoactive substance abuse
F19.2 Mental and behavioural disorders due to multiple drug use and use of psychoactive
     substances, dependence syndrome
    Note:
   A cluster of behavioural, cognitive, and physiological phenomena that develop after repeated
  substance use and that typically include a strong desire to take the drug, difficulties in controlling
 its use, persisting in its use despite harmful consequences, a higher priority given to drug use
than to other activities and obligations, increased tolerance, and sometimes a physical
withdrawal state. The dependence syndrome may be present for a specific psychoactive
substance (e.g. tobacco, alcohol, or diazepam), for a class of substances (e.g. opioid drugs), or
for a wider range of pharmacologically different psychoactive substances.
Includes:
Chronic alcoholism
Dipsomania
Drug addiction
F19.3 Mental and behavioural disorders due to multiple drug use and use of psychoactive
     substances, withdrawal state
    Note:
   A group of symptoms of variable clustering and severity occurring on absolute or relative
  withdrawal of a psychoactive substance after persistent use of that substance. The onset and
 course of the withdrawal state are time-limited and are related to the type of psychoactive
substance and dose being used immediately before cessation or reduction of use. The withdrawal
state may be complicated by convulsions.
234
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F19.4
Mental and behavioural disorders due to multiple drug use and use of psychoactive
substances, withdrawal state with delirium
Note:
A condition where the withdrawal state as defined in the common fourth character .3 is
complicated by delirium as defined in F05.-. Convulsions may also occur. When organic factors
are also considered to play a role in the etiology, the condition should be classified to F05.8.
Includes:
Delirium tremens (alcohol-induced)
F19.5 Mental and behavioural disorders due to multiple drug use and use of psychoactive
     substances, psychotic disorder
    Note:
   A cluster of psychotic phenomena that occur during or following psychoactive substance use but
  that are not explained on the basis of acute intoxication alone and do not form part of a
 withdrawal state. The disorder is characterized by hallucinations (typically auditory, but often in
more than one sensory modality), perceptual distortions, delusions (often of a paranoid or
persecutory nature), psychomotor disturbances (excitement or stupor), and an abnormal affect,
which may range from intense fear to ecstasy. The sensorium is usually clear but some degree
of clouding of consciousness, though not severe confusion, may be present.
Includes:
Alcoholic:
•
 hallucinosis
•
 jealousy
•
 paranoia
•
 psychosis NOS
Excludes:
alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced residual and late-onset psychotic disorder
(F10-F19 with common fourth character .7)
F19.6 
F19.6
Mental and behavioural disorders due to multiple drug use and use of psychoactive
substances, amnesic syndrome
Note:
A syndrome associated with chronic prominent impairment of recent and remote memory.
Immediate recall is usually preserved and recent memory is characteristically more disturbed
than remote memory. Disturbances of time sense and ordering of events are usually evident, as
are difficulties in learning new material. Confabulation may be marked but is not invariably
present. Other cognitive functions are usually relatively well preserved and amnesic defects are
out of proportion to other disturbances.
Includes:
Amnestic disorder, alcohol- or drug-induced
Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome, alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced or
unspecified
Use additional code, (E51.2 †G32.8*) when associated with Wernicke's disease or syndrome.
 Excludes:
nonalcoholic Korsakov's psychosis or syndrome (F04)
235
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F19.7 Mental and behavioural disorders due to multiple drug use and use of psychoactive
     substances, residual and late-onset psychotic disorder
    Note:
   A disorder in which alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced changes of cognition, affect,
  personality, or behaviour persist beyond the period during which a direct psychoactive
 substance-related effect might reasonably be assumed to be operating. Onset of the disorder
should be directly related to the use of the psychoactive substance. Cases in which initial onset
of the state occurs later than episode(s) of such substance use should be coded here only where
clear and strong evidence is available to attribute the state to the residual effect of the
psychoactive substance. Flashbacks may be distinguished from psychotic state partly by their
episodic nature, frequently of very short duration, and by their duplication of previous alcohol-
or other psychoactive substance-related experiences.
Includes:
Alcoholic dementia NOS
Chronic alcoholic brain syndrome
Dementia and other milder forms of persisting impairment of cognitive functions
Flashbacks
Late-onset psychoactive substance-induced psychotic disorder
Posthallucinogen perception disorder
Residual:
•
 affective disorder
•
 disorder of personality and behaviour
Excludes:
alcohol- or psychoactive substance-induced:
•
 Korsakov's syndrome (F10-F19 with common fourth character .6)
•
 psychotic state (F10-F19 with common fourth character .5)
F19.8 Mental and behavioural disorders due to multiple drug use and use of psychoactive
     substances, other mental and behavioural disorders
F19.9 Mental and behavioural disorders due to multiple drug use and use of psychoactive
     substances, unspecified mental and behavioural disorder
F19.7
236
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders
(F20-F29)
Note:
F20
F20.2
This block brings together schizophrenia, as the most important member of the group, schizotypal disorder,
persistent delusional disorders, and a larger group of acute and transient psychotic disorders. Schizoaffective
disorders have been retained here in spite of their controversial nature.
Schizophrenia
Note:
Excludes:
The schizophrenic disorders are characterized in general by fundamental and characteristic
distortions of thinking and perception, and affects that are inappropriate or blunted. Clear
consciousness and intellectual capacity are usually maintained although certain cognitive
deficits may evolve in the course of time. The most important psychopathological phenomena
include thought echo; thought insertion or withdrawal; thought broadcasting; delusional
perception and delusions of control; influence or passivity; hallucinatory voices commenting or
discussing the patient in the third person; thought disorders and negative symptoms.
The course of schizophrenic disorders can be either continuous, or episodic with progressive or
stable deficit, or there can be one or more episodes with complete or incomplete remission. The
diagnosis of schizophrenia should not be made in the presence of extensive depressive or manic
symptoms unless it is clear that schizophrenic symptoms antedate the affective disturbance. Nor
should schizophrenia be diagnosed in the presence of overt brain disease or during states of drug
intoxication or withdrawal. Similar disorders developing in the presence of epilepsy or other
brain disease should be classified under F06.2, and those induced by psychoactive substances
under F10-F19 with common fourth character .5.
schizophrenia:
•
acute (undifferentiated) (F23.2)
•
cyclic (F25.2)
schizophrenic reaction (F23.2)
schizotypal disorder (F21)
F20.0 Paranoid schizophrenia
     Note:
    Paranoid schizophrenia is dominated by relatively stable, often paranoid delusions, usually
   accompanied by hallucinations, particularly of the auditory variety, and perceptual disturbances.
  Disturbances of affect, volition and speech, and catatonic symptoms, are either absent or
 relatively inconspicuous.
Includes:
Paraphrenic schizophrenia
Excludes:
involutional paranoid state (F22.8)
paranoia (F22.0)
F20.1 Hebephrenic schizophrenia
     Note:
    A form of schizophrenia in which affective changes are prominent, delusions and hallucinations
   fleeting and fragmentary, behaviour irresponsible and unpredictable, and mannerisms common.
  The mood is shallow and inappropriate, thought is disorganized, and speech is incoherent. There
 is a tendency to social isolation. Usually the prognosis is poor because of the rapid development
of "negative" symptoms, particularly flattening of affect and loss of volition. Hebephrenia
should normally be diagnosed only in adolescents or young adults.
Includes:
Disorganized schizophrenia
Hebephrenia
F20.2 Catatonic schizophrenia
     Note:
    Catatonic schizophrenia is dominated by prominent psychomotor disturbances that may
   alternate between extremes such as hyperkinesis and stupor, or automatic obedience and
  negativism. Constrained attitudes and postures may be maintained for long periods. Episodes of
 violent excitement may be a striking feature of the condition. The catatonic phenomena may be
combined with a dream-like (oneiroid) state with vivid scenic hallucinations.
Includes:
Catatonic stupor
Schizophrenic:
•
 catalepsy
•
 catatonia
•
 flexibilitas cerea
237
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F20.3 Undifferentiated schizophrenia
     Note:
    Psychotic conditions meeting the general diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia but not
   conforming to any of the subtypes in F20.0-F20.2, or exhibiting the features of more than one of
  them without a clear predominance of a particular set of diagnostic characteristics.
 Includes:
Atypical schizophrenia
Excludes:
acute schizophrenia-like psychotic disorder (F23.2)
chronic undifferentiated schizophrenia (F20.5)
post-schizophrenic depression (F20.4)
F20.4 Post-schizophrenic depression
     Note:
    A depressive episode, which may be prolonged, arising in the aftermath of a schizophrenic
   illness. Some schizophrenic symptoms, either "positive" or "negative", must still be present but
  they no longer dominate the clinical picture. These depressive states are associated with an
 increased risk of suicide. If the patient no longer has any schizophrenic symptoms, a depressive
episode should be diagnosed (F32.-). If schizophrenic symptoms are still florid and prominent,
the diagnosis should remain that of the appropriate schizophrenic subtype (F20.0-F20.3).
F20.5 Residual schizophrenia
     Note:
    A chronic stage in the development of a schizophrenic illness in which there has been a clear
   progression from an early stage to a later stage characterized by long- term, though not
  necessarily irreversible, "negative" symptoms, e.g. psychomotor slowing; underactivity;
 blunting of affect; passivity and lack of initiative; poverty of quantity or content of speech; poor
nonverbal communication by facial expression, eye contact, voice modulation and posture; poor
self-care and social performance.
Includes:
Chronic undifferentiated schizophrenia
Restzustand (schizophrenic)
Schizophrenic residual state
F20.6 Simple schizophrenia
     Note:
    A disorder in which there is an insidious but progressive development of oddities of conduct,
   inability to meet the demands of society, and decline in total performance. The characteristic
  negative features of residual schizophrenia (e.g. blunting of affect and loss of volition) develop
 without being preceded by any overt psychotic symptoms.
F20.8 Other schizophrenia
     Includes:
    Cenesthopathic schizophrenia
   Schizophreniform:
  •
   disorder NOS
  •
   psychosis NOS
  Excludes:
 brief schizophreniform disorders (F23.2)
F20.9 Schizophrenia, unspecified
F20.3
238
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F21
Schizotypal disorder
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
F22
A disorder characterized by eccentric behaviour and anomalies of thinking and affect which
resemble those seen in schizophrenia, though no definite and characteristic schizophrenic
anomalies occur at any stage. The symptoms may include a cold or inappropriate affect;
anhedonia; odd or eccentric behaviour; a tendency to social withdrawal; paranoid or bizarre
ideas not amounting to true delusions; obsessive ruminations; thought disorder and perceptual
disturbances; occasional transient quasi-psychotic episodes with intense illusions, auditory or
other hallucinations, and delusion-like ideas, usually occurring without external provocation.
There is no definite onset and evolution and course are usually those of a personality disorder.
Latent schizophrenic reaction
Schizophrenia:
•
borderline
•
latent
•
prepsychotic
•
prodromal
•
pseudoneurotic
•
pseudopsychopathic
Schizotypal personality disorder
Asperger's syndrome (F84.5)
schizoid personality disorder (F60.1)
F22.9
Persistent delusional disorders
Note:
Includes a variety of disorders in which long-standing delusions constitute the only, or the most
conspicuous, clinical characteristic and which cannot be classified as organic, schizophrenic or
affective. Delusional disorders that have lasted for less than a few months should be classified,
at least temporarily, under F23.-.
F22.0 Delusional disorder
     Note:
    A disorder characterized by the development either of a single delusion or of a set of related
   delusions that are usually persistent and sometimes lifelong. The content of the delusion or
  delusions is very variable. Clear and persistent auditory hallucinations (voices), schizophrenic
 symptoms such as delusions of control and marked blunting of affect, and definite evidence of
brain disease are all incompatible with this diagnosis. However, the presence of occasional or
transitory auditory hallucinations, particularly in elderly patients, does not rule out this
diagnosis, provided that they are not typically schizophrenic and form only a small part of the
overall clinical picture.
Includes:
Paranoia
Paranoid:
•
 psychosis
•
 state
Paraphrenia (late)
Sensitiver Beziehungswahn
Excludes:
paranoid:
•
 personality disorder (F60.0)
•
 psychosis, psychogenic (F23.3)
•
 reaction (F23.3)
•
 schizophrenia (F20.0)
F22.8 Other persistent delusional disorders
     Note:
    Disorders in which the delusion or delusions are accompanied by persistent hallucinatory voices
   or by schizophrenic symptoms that do not justify a diagnosis of schizophrenia (F20.-).
  Includes:
 Delusional dysmorphophobia
Involutional paranoid state
Paranoia querulans
F22.9 Persistent delusional disorder, unspecified
239
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F23
Acute and transient psychotic disorders
Note:
F23
A heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by the acute onset of psychotic symptoms
such as delusions, hallucinations, and perceptual disturbances, and by the severe disruption of
ordinary behaviour. Acute onset is defined as a crescendo development of a clearly abnormal
clinical picture in about two weeks or less. For these disorders there is no evidence of organic
causation. Perplexity and puzzlement are often present but disorientation for time, place and
person is not persistent or severe enough to justify a diagnosis of organically caused delirium
(F05.-). Complete recovery usually occurs within a few months, often within a few weeks or
even days. If the disorder persists, a change in classification will be necessary. The disorder may
or may not be associated with acute stress, defined as usually stressful events preceding the onset
by one to two weeks.
F23.0 Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder without symptoms of schizophrenia
     Note:
    An acute psychotic disorder in which hallucinations, delusions or perceptual disturbances are
   obvious but markedly variable, changing from day to day or even from hour to hour. Emotional
  turmoil with intense transient feelings of happiness or ecstasy, or anxiety and irritability, is also
 frequently present. The polymorphism and instability are characteristic for the overall clinical
picture and the psychotic features do not justify a diagnosis of schizophrenia (F20.-). These
disorders often have an abrupt onset, developing rapidly within a few days, and they frequently
show a rapid resolution of symptoms with no recurrence. If the symptoms persist the diagnosis
should be changed to persistent delusional disorder (F22.-).
Includes:
Bouffée délirante without symptoms of schizophrenia or unspecified
 Cycloid psychosis without symptoms of schizophrenia or unspecified
F23.1 Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder with symptoms of schizophrenia
     Note:
    An acute psychotic disorder in which the polymorphic and unstable clinical picture is present,
   as described in F23.0; despite this instability, however, some symptoms typical of schizophrenia
  are also in evidence for the majority of the time. If the schizophrenic symptoms persist the
 diagnosis should be changed to schizophrenia (F20.-).
Includes:
Bouffée délirante without symptoms of schizophrenia or unspecified
 Cycloid psychosis without symptoms of schizophrenia or unspecified
F23.2 Acute schizophrenia-like psychotic disorder
     Note:
    An acute psychotic disorder in which the psychotic symptoms are comparatively stable and
   justify a diagnosis of schizophrenia, but have lasted for less than about one month; the
  polymorphic unstable features, as described in F23.0, are absent. If the schizophrenic symptoms
 persist the diagnosis should be changed to schizophrenia (F20.-).
Includes:
Acute (undifferentiated) schizophrenia
Brief schizophreniform:
•
 disorder
•
 psychosis
Oneirophrenia
Schizophrenic reaction
Excludes:
organic delusional [schizophrenia-like] disorder (F06.2)
schizophreniform disorders NOS (F20.8)
F23.3 Other acute predominantly delusional psychotic disorders
     Note:
    Acute psychotic disorders in which comparatively stable delusions or hallucinations are the
   main clinical features, but do not justify a diagnosis of schizophrenia (F20.-). If the delusions
  persist the diagnosis should be changed to persistent delusional disorder (F22.-).
 Includes:
Paranoid reaction
Psychogenic paranoid psychosis
F23.8 Other acute and transient psychotic disorders
     Note:
    Any other specified acute psychotic disorders for which there is no evidence of organic
   causation and which do not justify classification to F23.0-F23.3.
F23.9 Acute and transient psychotic disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Brief reactive psychosis NOS
   Reactive psychosis
240
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F24
Induced delusional disorder
Note:
Includes:
F25
A delusional disorder shared by two or more people with close emotional links. Only one of the
people suffers from a genuine psychotic disorder; the delusions are induced in the other(s) and
usually disappear when the people are separated.
Folie à deux
Induced:
•
paranoid disorder
•
psychotic disorder
F29
Schizoaffective disorders
Note:
Episodic disorders in which both affective and schizophrenic symptoms are prominent but
which do not justify a diagnosis of either schizophrenia or depressive or manic episodes. Other
conditions in which affective symptoms are superimposed on a pre-existing schizophrenic
illness, or co-exist or alternate with persistent delusional disorders of other kinds, are classified
under F20-F29. Mood-incongruent psychotic symptoms in affective disorders do not justify a
diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder.
F25.0 Schizoaffective disorder, manic type
     Note:
    A disorder in which both schizophrenic and manic symptoms are prominent so that the episode
   of illness does not justify a diagnosis of either schizophrenia or a manic episode. This category
  should be used for both a single episode and a recurrent disorder in which the majority of
 episodes are schizoaffective, manic type.
Includes:
Schizoaffective psychosis, manic type
Schizophreniform psychosis, manic type
F25.1 Schizoaffective disorder, depressive type
     Note:
    A disorder in which both schizophrenic and depressive symptoms are prominent so that the
   episode of illness does not justify a diagnosis of either schizophrenia or a depressive episode.
  This category should be used for both a single episode and a recurrent disorder in which the
 majority of episodes are schizoaffective, depressive type.
Includes:
Schizoaffective psychosis, depressive type
Schizophreniform psychosis, depressive type
F25.2 Schizoaffective disorder, mixed type
     Includes:
    Cyclic schizophrenia
   Mixed schizophrenic and affective psychosis
F25.8 Other schizoaffective disorders
F25.9 Schizoaffective disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Schizoaffective psychosis NOS
F28
Other nonorganic psychotic disorders
Note:
Includes:
F29
Delusional or hallucinatory disorders that do not justify a diagnosis of schizophrenia (F20.-),
persistent delusional disorders (F22.-), acute and transient psychotic disorders (F23.-), psychotic
types of manic episode (F30.2), or severe depressive episode (F32.3).
Chronic hallucinatory psychosis
Unspecified nonorganic psychosis
Includes:
Excludes:
Psychosis NOS
mental disorder NOS (F99)
organic or symptomatic psychosis NOS (F09)
241
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F30
Mood [affective] disorders
(F30-F39)
Note:
F30
This block contains disorders in which the fundamental disturbance is a change in affect or mood to depression
(with or without associated anxiety) or to elation. The mood change is usually accompanied by a change in the
overall level of activity; most of the other symptoms are either secondary to, or easily understood in the context
of, the change in mood and activity. Most of these disorders tend to be recurrent and the onset of individual
episodes can often be related to stressful events or situations.
Manic episode
Note:
Includes:
All the subdivisions of this category should be used only for a single episode. Hypomanic or
manic episodes in individuals who have had one or more previous affective episodes
(depressive, hypomanic, manic, or mixed) should be coded as bipolar affective disorder (F31.-).
bipolar disorder, single manic episode
F30.0 Hypomania
     Note:
    A disorder characterized by a persistent mild elevation of mood, increased energy and activity,
   and usually marked feelings of well-being and both physical and mental efficiency. Increased
  sociability, talkativeness, over-familiarity, increased sexual energy, and a decreased need for
 sleep are often present but not to the extent that they lead to severe disruption of work or result
in social rejection. Irritability, conceit, and boorish behaviour may take the place of the more
usual euphoric sociability. The disturbances of mood and behaviour are not accompanied by
hallucinations or delusions.
F30.1 Mania without psychotic symptoms
     Note:
    Mood is elevated out of keeping with the patient's circumstances and may vary from carefree
   joviality to almost uncontrollable excitement. Elation is accompanied by increased energy,
  resulting in overactivity, pressure of speech, and a decreased need for sleep. Attention cannot be
 sustained, and there is often marked distractibility. Self-esteem is often inflated with grandiose
ideas and overconfidence. Loss of normal social inhibitions may result in behaviour that is
reckless, foolhardy, or inappropriate to the circumstances, and out of character.
F30.2 Mania with psychotic symptoms
     Note:
    In addition to the clinical picture described in F30.1, delusions (usually grandiose) or
   hallucinations (usually of voices speaking directly to the patient) are present, or the excitement,
  excessive motor activity, and flight of ideas are so extreme that the subject is incomprehensible
 or inaccessible to ordinary communication.
Includes:
Mania with:
•
 mood-congruent psychotic symptoms
•
 mood-incongruent psychotic symptoms
Manic stupor
F30.8 Other manic episodes
F30.9 Manic episode, unspecified
     Includes:
    Mania NOS
F31
Bipolar affective disorder
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
242
A disorder characterized by two or more episodes in which the patient's mood and activity levels
are significantly disturbed, this disturbance consisting on some occasions of an elevation of
mood and increased energy and activity (hypomania or mania) and on others of a lowering of
mood and decreased energy and activity (depression). Repeated episodes of hypomania or mania
only are classified as bipolar.
manic-depressive:
•
illness
•
psychosis
•
reaction
bipolar disorder, single manic episode (F30.-)
cyclothymia (F34.0)
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F31.0
Bipolar affective disorder, current episode hypomanic
Note:
The patient is currently hypomanic, and has had at least one other affective episode (hypomanic,
manic, depressive, or mixed) in the past.
F31.1 Bipolar affective disorder, current episode manic without psychotic symptoms
     Note:
    The patient is currently manic, without psychotic symptoms (as in F30.1), and has had at least
   one other affective episode (hypomanic, manic, depressive, or mixed) in the past.
F31.2 Bipolar affective disorder, current episode manic with psychotic symptoms
     Note:
    The patient is currently manic, with psychotic symptoms (as in F30.2), and has had at least one
   other affective episode (hypomanic, manic, depressive, or mixed) in the past.
F31.3 Bipolar affective disorder, current episode mild or moderate depression
     Note:
    The patient is currently depressed, as in a depressive episode of either mild or moderate severity
   (F32.0 or F32.1), and has had at least one authenticated hypomanic, manic, or mixed affective
  episode in the past.
F31.4 Bipolar affective disorder, current episode severe depression without psychotic symptoms
     Note:
    The patient is currently depressed, as in severe depressive episode without psychotic symptoms
   (F32.2), and has had at least one authenticated hypomanic, manic, or mixed affective episode in
  the past.
F31.5 Bipolar affective disorder, current episode severe depression with psychotic symptoms
     Note:
    The patient is currently depressed, as in severe depressive episode with psychotic symptoms
   (F32.3), and has had at least one authenticated hypomanic, manic, or mixed affective episode in
  the past.
F31.6 Bipolar affective disorder, current episode mixed
     Note:
    The patient has had at least one authenticated hypomanic, manic, depressive, or mixed affective
   episode in the past, and currently exhibits either a mixture or a rapid alteration of manic and
  depressive symptoms.
 Includes:
rapid cycling
Excludes:
single mixed affective episode (F38.0)
F31.7 Bipolar affective disorder, currently in remission
     Note:
    The patient has had at least one authenticated hypomanic, manic, or mixed affective episode in
   the past, and at least one other affective episode (hypomanic, manic, depressive, or mixed) in
  addition, but is not currently suffering from any significant mood disturbance, and has not done
 so for several months. Periods of remission during prophylactic treatment should be coded here.
F31.8 Other bipolar affective disorders
     Includes:
    Bipolar II disorder
   Recurrent manic episodes NOS
F31.9 
F31.9
Bipolar affective disorder, unspecified
243
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F32
Depressive episode
Note:
F32
Includes:
Excludes:
In typical mild, moderate, or severe depressive episodes, the patient suffers from lowering of
mood, reduction of energy, and decrease in activity. Capacity for enjoyment, interest, and
concentration is reduced, and marked tiredness after even minimum effort is common. Sleep is
usually disturbed and appetite diminished. Self-esteem and self-confidence are almost always
reduced and, even in the mild form, some ideas of guilt or worthlessness are often present. The
lowered mood varies little from day to day, is unresponsive to circumstances and may be
accompanied by so-called "somatic" symptoms, such as loss of interest and pleasurable feelings,
waking in the morning several hours before the usual time, depression worst in the morning,
marked psychomotor retardation, agitation, loss of appetite, weight loss, and loss of libido.
Depending upon the number and severity of the symptoms, a depressive episode may be
specified as mild, moderate or severe.
single episodes of:
•
depressive reaction
•
psychogenic depression
•
reactive depression
adjustment disorder (F43.2)
depression, not yet clinically diagnosed (R45.2)
feeling depressed (R45.2)
recurrent depressive disorder (F33.-)
when associated with conduct disorders in F91.-(F92.0)
F32.0 Mild depressive episode
     Note:
    Two or three of the above symptoms are usually present. The patient is usually distressed by
   these but will probably be able to continue with most activities.
F32.1 Moderate depressive episode
     Note:
    Four or more of the above symptoms are usually present and the patient is likely to have great
   difficulty in continuing with ordinary activities.
F32.2 Severe depressive episode without psychotic symptoms
     Note:
    An episode of depression in which several of the above symptoms are marked and distressing,
   typically loss of self-esteem and ideas of worthlessness or guilt. Suicidal thoughts and acts are
  common and a number of "somatic" symptoms are usually present.
 Includes:
Agitated
Major
depression single episode without psychotic symptoms
Vital
F32.3 Severe depressive episode with psychotic symptoms
     Note:
    An episode of depression as described in F32.2, but with the presence of hallucinations,
   delusions, psychomotor retardation, or stupor so severe that ordinary social activities are
  impossible; there may be danger to life from suicide, dehydration, or starvation. The
 hallucinations and delusions may or may not be mood-congruent.
Includes:
Single episodes of:
•
 major depression with psychotic symptoms
•
 psychogenic depressive psychosis
•
 psychotic depression
•
 reactive depressive psychosis
F32.8 Other depressive episodes
     Includes:
    Atypical depression
   Single episodes of "masked" depression NOS
F32.9 Depressive episode, unspecified
     Includes:
    Depression NOS
   Depressive disorder NOS
244
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F33
Recurrent depressive disorder
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
A disorder characterized by repeated episodes of depression as described for depressive episode
(F32.-), without any history of independent episodes of mood elevation and increased energy
(mania). There may, however, be brief episodes of mild mood elevation and overactivity
(hypomania) immediately after a depressive episode, sometimes precipitated by antidepressant
treatment. The more severe forms of recurrent depressive disorder (F33.2 and F33.3) have much
in common with earlier concepts such as manic-depressive depression, melancholia, vital
depression and endogenous depression. The first episode may occur at any age from childhood
to old age, the onset may be either acute or insidious, and the duration varies from a few weeks
to many months. The risk that a patient with recurrent depressive disorder will have an episode
of mania never disappears completely, however many depressive episodes have been
experienced. If such an episode does occur, the diagnosis should be changed to bipolar affective
disorder (F31.-).
recurrent episodes of:
•
depressive reaction
•
psychogenic depression
•
reactive depression
seasonal depressive disorder
recurrent brief depressive episodes (F38.1)
F33.0 Recurrent depressive disorder, current episode mild
     Note:
    A disorder characterized by repeated episodes of depression, the current episode being mild, as
   in F32.0, and without any history of mania.
F33.1 Recurrent depressive disorder, current episode moderate
     Note:
    A disorder characterized by repeated episodes of depression, the current episode being of
   moderate severity, as in F32.1, and without any history of mania.
F33.2 Recurrent depressive disorder, current episode severe without psychotic symptoms
     Note:
    A disorder characterized by repeated episodes of depression, the current episode being severe
   without psychotic symptoms, as in F32.2, and without any history of mania.
  Includes:
 Endogenous depression without psychotic symptoms
Major depression, recurrent without psychotic symptoms
Manic-depressive psychosis, depressed type without psychotic symptoms
Vital depression, recurrent without psychotic symptoms
F33.3 Recurrent depressive disorder, current episode severe with psychotic symptoms
     Note:
    A disorder characterized by repeated episodes of depression, the current episode being severe
   with psychotic symptoms, as in F32.3, and with no previous episodes of mania.
  Includes:
 Endogenous depression with psychotic symptoms
Manic-depressive psychosis, depressed type with psychotic symptoms
rapid cycling
Recurrent severe episodes of:
•
 major depression with psychotic symptoms
•
 psychogenic depressive psychosis
•
 psychotic depression
•
 reactive depressive psychosis
F33.4 Recurrent depressive disorder, currently in remission
     Note:
    The patient has had two or more depressive episodes as described in F33.0-F33.3, in the past,
   but has been free from depressive symptoms for several months.
F33.8 Other recurrent depressive disorders
F33.9 
F33.9
Recurrent depressive disorder, unspecified
Includes:
Monopolar depression NOS
245
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F34
Persistent mood [affective] disorders
Note:
F34
Persistent and usually fluctuating disorders of mood in which the majority of the individual
episodes are not sufficiently severe to warrant being described as hypomanic or mild depressive
episodes. Because they last for many years, and sometimes for the greater part of the patient's
adult life, they involve considerable distress and disability. In some instances, recurrent or single
manic or depressive episodes may become superimposed on a persistent affective disorder.
F34.0 Cyclothymia
     Note:
    A persistent instability of mood involving numerous periods of depression and mild elation,
   none of which is sufficiently severe or prolonged to justify a diagnosis of bipolar affective
  disorder (F31.-) or recurrent depressive disorder (F33.-). This disorder is frequently found in the
 relatives of patients with bipolar affective disorder. Some patients with cyclothymia eventually
develop bipolar affective disorder.
Includes:
Affective personality disorder
Cycloid personality
Cyclothymic personality
F34.1 Dysthymia
     Note:
    A chronic depression of mood, lasting at least several years, which is not sufficiently severe, or
   in which individual episodes are not sufficiently prolonged, to justify a diagnosis of severe,
  moderate, or mild recurrent depressive disorder (F33.-).
 Includes:
Depressive:
•
 neurosis
•
 personality disorder
Neurotic depression
Persistent anxiety depression
Excludes:
anxiety depression (mild or not persistent) (F41.2)
F34.8 Other persistent mood [affective] disorders
F34.9 Persistent mood [affective] disorder, unspecified
F38
Other mood [affective] disorders
Note:
Any other mood disorders that do not justify classification to F30-F34, because they are not of
sufficient severity or duration.
F38.0 Other single mood [affective] disorders
     Includes:
    Mixed affective episode
F38.1 Other recurrent mood [affective] disorders
     Includes:
    Recurrent brief depressive episodes
F38.8 Other specified mood [affective] disorders
F39
Unspecified mood [affective] disorder
Includes:
246
Affective psychosis NOS
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders
(F40-F48)
Excludes:
F40
F41
when associated with conduct disorder in F91.-(F92.8)
Phobic anxiety disorders
Note:
A group of disorders in which anxiety is evoked only, or predominantly, in certain well-defined
situations that are not currently dangerous. As a result these situations are characteristically
avoided or endured with dread. The patient's concern may be focused on individual symptoms
like palpitations or feeling faint and is often associated with secondary fears of dying, losing
control, or going mad. Contemplating entry to the phobic situation usually generates anticipatory
anxiety. Phobic anxiety and depression often coexist. Whether two diagnoses, phobic anxiety
and depressive episode, are needed, or only one, is determined by the time course of the two
conditions and by therapeutic considerations at the time of consultation.
F40.0 Agoraphobia
     Note:
    A fairly well-defined cluster of phobias embracing fears of leaving home, entering shops,
   crowds and public places, or travelling alone in trains, buses or planes. Panic disorder is a
  frequent feature of both present and past episodes. Depressive and obsessional symptoms and
 social phobias are also commonly present as subsidiary features. Avoidance of the phobic
situation is often prominent, and some agoraphobics experience little anxiety because they are
able to avoid their phobic situations.
Includes:
Agoraphobia without history of panic disorder
Panic disorder with agoraphobia
F40.1 Social phobias
     Note:
    Fear of scrutiny by other people leading to avoidance of social situations. More pervasive social
   phobias are usually associated with low self-esteem and fear of criticism. They may present as
  a complaint of blushing, hand tremor, nausea, or urgency of micturition, the patient sometimes
 being convinced that one of these secondary manifestations of their anxiety is the primary
problem. Symptoms may progress to panic attacks.
Includes:
Anthropophobia
Social neurosis
F40.2 Specific (isolated) phobias
     Note:
    Phobias restricted to highly specific situations such as proximity to particular animals, heights,
   thunder, darkness, flying, closed spaces, urinating or defecating in public toilets, eating certain
  foods, dentistry, or the sight of blood or injury. Though the triggering situation is discrete,
 contact with it can evoke panic as in agoraphobia or social phobia.
Includes:
Acrophobia
Animal phobias
Claustrophobia
Simple phobia
Excludes:
dysmorphophobia (nondelusional) (F45.2)
nosophobia (F45.2)
F40.8 Other phobic anxiety disorders
F40.9 Phobic anxiety disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Phobia NOS
   Phobic state NOS
F41
Other anxiety disorders
Note:
Disorders in which manifestation of anxiety is the major symptom and is not restricted to any
particular environmental situation. Depressive and obsessional symptoms, and even some
elements of phobic anxiety, may also be present, provided that they are clearly secondary or less
severe.
247
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F41.0 Panic disorder [episodic paroxysmal anxiety]
     Note:
    The essential feature is recurrent attacks of severe anxiety (panic), which are not restricted to any
   particular situation or set of circumstances and are therefore unpredictable. As with other anxiety
  disorders, the dominant symptoms include sudden onset of palpitations, chest pain, choking
 sensations, dizziness, and feelings of unreality (depersonalization or derealization). There is
often also a secondary fear of dying, losing control, or going mad. Panic disorder should not be
given as the main diagnosis if the patient has a depressive disorder at the time the attacks start;
in these circumstances the panic attacks are probably secondary to depression.
Includes:
Panic:
•
 attack
•
 state
Excludes:
panic disorder with agoraphobia (F40.0)
F41.1 Generalized anxiety disorder
     Note:
    Anxiety that is generalized and persistent but not restricted to, or even strongly predominating
   in, any particular environmental circumstances (i.e. it is "free-floating"). The dominant
  symptoms are variable but include complaints of persistent nervousness, trembling, muscular
 tensions, sweating, lightheadedness, palpitations, dizziness, and epigastric discomfort. Fears
that the patient or a relative will shortly become ill or have an accident are often expressed.
Includes:
Anxiety:
•
 neurosis
•
 reaction
•
 state
Excludes:
neurasthenia (F48.0)
F41.2 Mixed anxiety and depressive disorder
     Note:
    This category should be used when symptoms of anxiety and depression are both present, but
   neither is clearly predominant, and neither type of symptom is present to the extent that justifies
  a diagnosis if considered separately. When both anxiety and depressive symptoms are present
 and severe enough to justify individual diagnoses, both diagnoses should be recorded and this
category should not be used.
Includes:
Anxiety depression (mild or not persistent)
F41.3 Other mixed anxiety disorders
     Note:
    Symptoms of anxiety mixed with features of other disorders in F42-F48. Neither type of
   symptom is severe enough to justify a diagnosis if considered separately.
F41.8 Other specified anxiety disorders
     Includes:
    Anxiety hysteria
F41.9 Anxiety disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Anxiety NOS
F41.0
F42
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
248
The essential feature is recurrent obsessional thoughts or compulsive acts. Obsessional thoughts
are ideas, images, or impulses that enter the patient's mind again and again in a stereotyped form.
They are almost invariably distressing and the patient often tries, unsuccessfully, to resist them.
They are, however, recognized as his or her own thoughts, even though they are involuntary and
often repugnant. Compulsive acts or rituals are stereotyped behaviours that are repeated again
and again. They are not inherently enjoyable, nor do they result in the completion of inherently
useful tasks. Their function is to prevent some objectively unlikely event, often involving harm
to or caused by the patient, which he or she fears might otherwise occur. Usually, this behaviour
is recognized by the patient as pointless or ineffectual and repeated attempts are made to resist.
Anxiety is almost invariably present. If compulsive acts are resisted the anxiety gets worse.
anankastic neurosis
obsessive-compulsive neurosis
obsessive-compulsive:
•
behaviour (R46.80)
•
personality (disorder) (F60.5)
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F42.0
Predominantly obsessional thoughts or ruminations
Note:
These may take the form of ideas, mental images, or impulses to act, which are nearly always
distressing to the subject. Sometimes the ideas are an indecisive, endless consideration of
alternatives, associated with an inability to make trivial but necessary decisions in day-to-day
living. The relationship between obsessional ruminations and depression is particularly close
and a diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder should be preferred only if ruminations arise
or persist in the absence of a depressive episode.
F42.1 Predominantly compulsive acts [obsessional rituals]
     Note:
    The majority of compulsive acts are concerned with cleaning (particularly handwashing),
   repeated checking to ensure that a potentially dangerous situation has not been allowed to
  develop, or orderliness and tidiness. Underlying the overt behaviour is a fear, usually of danger
 either to or caused by the patient, and the ritual is an ineffectual or symbolic attempt to avert that
danger.
F42.2 Mixed obsessional thoughts and acts
F42.8 Other obsessive-compulsive disorders
F42.9 
F43.0
Obsessive-compulsive disorder, unspecified
F43
Reaction to severe stress, and adjustment disorders
Note:
F43.0
This category differs from others in that it includes disorders identifiable on the basis of not only
symptoms and course but also the existence of one or other of two causative influences: an
exceptionally stressful life event producing an acute stress reaction, or a significant life change
leading to continued unpleasant circumstances that result in an adjustment disorder. Although
less severe psychosocial stress ("life events") may precipitate the onset or contribute to the
presentation of a very wide range of disorders classified elsewhere in this chapter, its etiological
importance is not always clear and in each case will be found to depend on individual, often
idiosyncratic, vulnerability, i.e. the life events are neither necessary nor sufficient to explain the
occurrence and form of the disorder. In contrast, the disorders brought together here are thought
to arise always as a direct consequence of acute severe stress or continued trauma. The stressful
events or the continuing unpleasant circumstances are the primary and overriding causal factor
and the disorder would not have occurred without their impact. The disorders in this section can
thus be regarded as maladaptive responses to severe or continued stress, in that they interfere
with successful coping mechanisms and therefore lead to problems of social functioning.
Acute stress reaction
Note:
A transient disorder that develops in an individual without any other apparent mental disorder in
response to exceptional physical and mental stress and that usually subsides within hours or
days. Individual vulnerability and coping capacity play a role in the occurrence and severity of
acute stress reactions. The symptoms show a typically mixed and changing picture and include
an initial state of "daze" with some constriction of the field of consciousness and narrowing of
attention, inability to comprehend stimuli, and disorientation. This state may be followed either
by further withdrawal from the surrounding situation (to the extent of a dissociative stupor -
F44.2), or by agitation and over-activity (flight reaction or fugue). Autonomic signs of panic
anxiety (tachycardia, sweating, flushing) are commonly present. The symptoms usually appear
within minutes of the impact of the stressful stimulus or event, and disappear within two to three
days (often within hours). Partial or complete amnesia (F44.0) for the episode may be present.
If the symptoms persist, a change in diagnosis should be considered.
Includes:
Acute:
•
crisis reaction
•
reaction to stress
Combat fatigue
Crisis state
Psychic shock
249
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F43.1 Post-traumatic stress disorder
     Note:
    Arises as a delayed or protracted response to a stressful event or situation (of either brief or long
   duration) of an exceptionally threatening or catastrophic nature, which is likely to cause
  pervasive distress in almost anyone. Predisposing factors, such as personality traits (e.g.
 compulsive, asthenic) or previous history of neurotic illness, may lower the threshold for the
development of the syndrome or aggravate its course, but they are neither necessary nor
sufficient to explain its occurrence. Typical features include episodes of repeated reliving of the
trauma in intrusive memories ("flashbacks"), dreams or nightmares, occurring against the
persisting background of a sense of "numbness" and emotional blunting, detachment from other
people, unresponsiveness to surroundings, anhedonia, and avoidance of activities and situations
reminiscent of the trauma. There is usually a state of autonomic hyperarousal with
hypervigilance, an enhanced startle reaction, and insomnia. Anxiety and depression are
commonly associated with the above symptoms and signs, and suicidal ideation is not
infrequent. The onset follows the trauma with a latency period that may range from a few weeks
to months. The course is fluctuating but recovery can be expected in the majority of cases. In a
small proportion of cases the condition may follow a chronic course over many years, with
eventual transition to an enduring personality change (F62.0).
Includes:
Traumatic neurosis
F43.2 Adjustment disorders
     Note:
    States of subjective distress and emotional disturbance, usually interfering with social
   functioning and performance, arising in the period of adaptation to a significant life change or a
  stressful life event. The stressor may have affected the integrity of an individual's social network
 (bereavement, separation experiences) or the wider system of social supports and values
(migration, refugee status), or represented a major developmental transition or crisis (going to
school, becoming a parent, failure to attain a cherished personal goal, retirement). Individual
predisposition or vulnerability plays an important role in the risk of occurrence and the shaping
of the manifestations of adjustment disorders, but it is nevertheless assumed that the condition
would not have arisen without the stressor. The manifestations vary and include depressed
mood, anxiety or worry (or mixture of these), a feeling of inability to cope, plan ahead, or
continue in the present situation, as well as some degree of disability in the performance of daily
routine. Conduct disorders may be an associated feature, particularly in adolescents. The
predominant feature may be a brief or prolonged depressive reaction, or a disturbance of other
emotions and conduct.
Includes:
Adolescent adjustment reaction
Culture shock
Grief reaction
Hospitalism in children
Excludes:
separation anxiety disorder of childhood (F93.0)
F43.8 Other reactions to severe stress
F43.9 Reaction to severe stress, unspecified
F43.1
250
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F44
Dissociative [conversion] disorders
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
The common themes that are shared by dissociative or conversion disorders are a partial or
complete loss of the normal integration between memories of the past, awareness of identity and
immediate sensations, and control of bodily movements. All types of dissociative disorders tend
to remit after a few weeks or months, particularly if their onset is associated with a traumatic life
event. More chronic disorders, particularly paralyses and anaesthesias, may develop if the onset
is associated with insoluble problems or interpersonal difficulties. These disorders have
previously been classified as various types of "conversion hysteria". They are presumed to be
psychogenic in origin, being associated closely in time with traumatic events, insoluble and
intolerable problems, or disturbed relationships. The symptoms often represent the patient's
concept of how a physical illness would be manifest. Medical examination and investigation do
not reveal the presence of any known physical or neurological disorder. In addition, there is
evidence that the loss of function is an expression of emotional conflicts or needs. The symptoms
may develop in close relationship to psychological stress, and often appear suddenly. Only
disorders of physical functions normally under voluntary control and loss of sensations are
included here. Disorders involving pain and other complex physical sensations mediated by the
autonomic nervous system are classified under somatization disorder (F45.0). The possibility of
the later appearance of serious physical or psychiatric disorders should always be kept in mind.
conversion:
•
hysteria
•
reaction
hysteria
hysterical psychosis
malingering [conscious simulation] (Z76.5)
F44.0 Dissociative amnesia
     Note:
    The main feature is loss of memory, usually of important recent events, that is not due to organic
   mental disorder, and is too great to be explained by ordinary forgetfulness or fatigue. The
  amnesia is usually centred on traumatic events, such as accidents or unexpected bereavements,
 and is usually partial and selective. Complete and generalized amnesia is rare, and is usually part
of a fugue (F44.1). If this is the case, the disorder should be classified as such. The diagnosis
should not be made in the presence of organic brain disorders, intoxication, or excessive fatigue.
Excludes:
alcohol- or other psychoactive substance-induced amnesic disorder (F10-F19 with common
fourth character .6)
amnesia:
•
 NOS (R41.3)
•
 anterograde (R41.1)
•
 retrograde (R41.2)
nonalcoholic organic amnesic syndrome (F04)
postictal amnesia in epilepsy (G40.-)
F44.1 Dissociative fugue
     Note:
    Dissociative fugue has all the features of dissociative amnesia, plus purposeful travel beyond the
   usual everyday range. Although there is amnesia for the period of the fugue, the patient's
  behaviour during this time may appear completely normal to independent observers
 Excludes:
postictal fugue in epilepsy (G40.-)
F44.2 
F44.2
Dissociative stupor
Note:
Dissociative stupor is diagnosed on the basis of a profound diminution or absence of voluntary
movement and normal responsiveness to external stimuli such as light, noise, and touch, but
examination and investigation reveal no evidence of a physical cause. In addition, there is
positive evidence of psychogenic causation in the form of recent stressful events or problems.
Excludes:
organic catatonic disorder (F06.1)
stupor:
•
 NOS (R40.1)
•
 catatonic (F20.2)
•
 depressive (F31-F33)
•
 manic (F30.2)
251
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F44.3 Trance and possession disorders
     Note:
    Disorders in which there is a temporary loss of the sense of personal identity and full awareness
   of the surroundings. Include here only trance states that are involuntary or unwanted, occurring
  outside religious or culturally accepted situations.
 Excludes:
states associated with:
•
 acute and transient psychotic disorders (F23.-)
•
 organic personality disorder (F07.0)
•
 postconcussional syndrome (F07.2)
•
 psychoactive substance intoxication (F10-F19 with common fourth character .0)
•
 schizophrenia (F20.-)
F44.4 Dissociative motor disorders
     Note:
    In the commonest varieties there is loss of ability to move the whole or a part of a limb or limbs.
   There may be close resemblance to almost any variety of ataxia, apraxia, akinesia, aphonia,
  dysarthria, dyskinesia, seizures, or paralysis.
 Includes:
Psychogenic:
•
 aphonia
•
 dysphonia
F44.5 Dissociative convulsions
     Note:
    Dissociative convulsions may mimic epileptic seizures very closely in terms of movements, but
   tongue-biting, bruising due to falling, and incontinence of urine are rare, and consciousness is
  maintained or replaced by a state of stupor or trance.
 Includes:
Pseudoseizures (psychogenic)
Psychogenic nonepileptic seizures
F44.6 Dissociative anaesthesia and sensory loss
     Note:
    Anaesthetic areas of skin often have boundaries that make it clear that they are associated with
   the patient's ideas about bodily functions, rather than medical knowledge. There may be
  differential loss between the sensory modalities which cannot be due to a neurological lesion.
 Sensory loss may be accompanied by complaints of paraesthesia. Loss of vision and hearing are
rarely total in dissociative disorders.
Includes:
Psychogenic deafness
F44.7 Mixed dissociative [conversion] disorders
     Includes:
    Combination of disorders specified in F44.0-F44.6
F44.8 Other dissociative [conversion] disorders
     Includes:
    Ganser's syndrome
   Multiple personality
  Psychogenic:
 •
  confusion
 •
  twilight state
F44.9 Dissociative [conversion] disorder, unspecified
F44.3
252
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F45
Somatoform disorders
Note:
Excludes:
The main feature is repeated presentation of physical symptoms together with persistent requests
for medical investigations, in spite of repeated negative findings and reassurances by doctors
that the symptoms have no physical basis. If any physical disorders are present, they do not
explain the nature and extent of the symptoms or the distress and preoccupation of the patient.
dissociative disorders (F44.-)
hair-plucking (F98.4)
lalling (F80.0)
lisping (F80.8)
nail-biting (F98.8)
psychological or behavioural factors associated with disorders or diseases classified elsewhere
(F54)
sexual dysfunction, not caused by organic disorder or disease (F52.-)
thumb-sucking (F98.8)
tic disorders (in childhood and adolescence) (F95.-)
Tourette's syndrome (F95.2)
trichotillomania (F63.3)
F45.0 Somatization disorder
     Note:
    The main features are multiple, recurrent and frequently changing physical symptoms of at least
   two years' duration. Most patients have a long and complicated history of contact with both
  primary and specialist medical care services, during which many negative investigations or
 fruitless exploratory operations may have been carried out. Symptoms may be referred to any
part or system of the body. The course of the disorder is chronic and fluctuating, and is often
associated with disruption of social, interpersonal, and family behaviour. Short-lived (less than
two years) and less striking symptom patterns should be classified under undifferentiated
somatoform disorder (F45.1).
Includes:
Briquets Disorder
Multiple psychosomatic disorder
Excludes:
malingering [conscious simulation] (Z76.5)
F45.1 Undifferentiated somatoform disorder
     Note:
    When somatoform complaints are multiple, varying and persistent, but the complete and typical
   clinical picture of somatization disorder is not fulfilled, the diagnosis of undifferentiated
  somatoform disorder should be considered.
 Includes:
Undifferentiated psychosomatic disorder
F45.2 
F45.2
Hypochondriacal disorder
Note:
The essential feature is a persistent preoccupation with the possibility of having one or more
serious and progressive physical disorders. Patients manifest persistent somatic complaints or a
persistent preoccupation with their physical appearance. Normal or commonplace sensations
and appearances are often interpreted by patients as abnormal and distressing, and attention is
usually focused upon only one or two organs or systems of the body. Marked depression and
anxiety are often present, and may justify additional diagnoses.
Includes:
Body dysmorphic disorder
Dysmorphophobia (nondelusional)
Hypochondriacal neurosis
Hypochondriasis
Nosophobia
Excludes:
delusional dysmorphophobia (F22.8)
fixed delusions about bodily functions or shape (F22.-)
253
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F45.3 Somatoform autonomic dysfunction
     Note:
    Symptoms are presented by the patient as if they were due to a physical disorder of a system or
   organ that is largely or completely under autonomic innervation and control, i.e. the
  cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, respiratory and urogenital systems. The symptoms are usually
 of two types, neither of which indicates a physical disorder of the organ or system concerned.
First, there are complaints based upon objective signs of autonomic arousal, such as palpitations,
sweating, flushing, tremor, and expression of fear and distress about the possibility of a physical
disorder. Second, there are subjective complaints of a nonspecific or changing nature such as
fleeting aches and pains, sensations of burning, heaviness, tightness, and feelings of being
bloated or distended, which are referred by the patient to a specific organ or system.
Includes:
Cardiac neurosis
Da Costa's syndrome
Gastric neurosis
Neurocirculatory asthenia
Psychogenic forms of:
•
 aerophagy
•
 cough
•
 diarrhoea
•
 dyspepsia
•
 dysuria
•
 flatulence
•
 hiccough
•
 hyperventilation
•
 increased frequency of micturition
•
 irritable bowel syndrome
•
 pylorospasm
Excludes:
psychological and behavioural factors associated with disorders or diseases classified elsewhere
(F54)
F45.4 Persistent somatoform pain disorder
     Note:
    The predominant complaint is of persistent, severe, and distressing pain, which cannot be
   explained fully by a physiological process or a physical disorder, and which occurs in
  association with emotional conflict or psychosocial problems that are sufficient to allow the
 conclusion that they are the main causative influences. The result is usually a marked increase
in support and attention, either personal or medical. Pain presumed to be of psychogenic origin
occurring during the course of depressive disorders or schizophrenia should not be included
here.
Includes:
Psychalgia
Psychogenic:
•
 backache
•
 headache
Somatoform pain disorder
Excludes:
backache NOS (M54.9)
pain:
•
 NOS (R52.9)
•
 acute (R52.0)
•
 chronic (R52.2)
•
 intractable (R52.1)
tension headache (G44.2)
F45.8 Other somatoform disorders
     Note:
    Any other disorders of sensation, function and behaviour, not due to physical disorders, which
   are not mediated through the autonomic nervous system, which are limited to specific systems
  or parts of the body, and which are closely associated in time with stressful events or problems.
 Includes:
Psychogenic:
•
 dysmenorrhoea
•
 dysphagia, including "globus hystericus"
•
 pruritus
•
 torticollis
Teeth-grinding
F45.3
254
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F45.9
F48
Somatoform disorder, unspecified
Includes:
Psychosomatic disorder NOS
F48.9
Other neurotic disorders
F48.0 Neurasthenia
     Note:
    Considerable cultural variations occur in the presentation of this disorder, and two main types
   occur, with substantial overlap. In one type, the main feature is a complaint of increased fatigue
  after mental effort, often associated with some decrease in occupational performance or coping
 efficiency in daily tasks. The mental fatiguability is typically described as an unpleasant
intrusion of distracting associations or recollections, difficulty in concentrating, and generally
inefficient thinking. In the other type, the emphasis is on feelings of bodily or physical weakness
and exhaustion after only minimal effort, accompanied by a feeling of muscular aches and pains
and inability to relax. In both types a variety of other unpleasant physical feelings is common,
such as dizziness, tension headaches, and feelings of general instability. Worry about decreasing
mental and bodily well-being, irritability, anhedonia, and varying minor degrees of both
depression and anxiety are all common. Sleep is often disturbed in its initial and middle phases
but hypersomnia may also be prominent.
Includes:
Fatigue syndrome
Use additional code, to identify previous physical illness.
Excludes:
asthenia NOS (R53)
burn-out (Z73.0)
malaise and fatigue (R53)
postviral fatigue syndrome (G93.3)
psychasthenia (F48.8)
F48.1 Depersonalization-derealization syndrome
     Note:
    A rare disorder in which the patient complains spontaneously that his or her mental activity,
   body, and surroundings are changed in their quality, so as to be unreal, remote, or automatized.
  Among the varied phenomena of the syndrome, patients complain most frequently of loss of
 emotions and feelings of estrangement or detachment from their thinking, their body, or the real
world. In spite of the dramatic nature of the experience, the patient is aware of the unreality of
the change. The sensorium is normal and the capacity for emotional expression intact.
Depersonalization-derealization symptoms may occur as part of a diagnosable schizophrenic,
depressive, phobic, or obsessive-compulsive disorder. In such cases the diagnosis should be that
of the main disorder.
F48.8 Other specified neurotic disorders
     Includes:
    Dhat syndrome
   Occupational neurosis, including writer's cramp
  Psychasthenia
 Psychasthenic neurosis
Psychogenic syncope
F48.9 Neurotic disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Neurosis NOS
255
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F50
Behavioural syndromes associated with physiological
disturbances and physical factors
(F50-F59)
F50
Eating disorders
Excludes:
anorexia NOS (R63.0)
feeding:
•
difficulties and mismanagement (R63.3)
•
disorder of infancy or childhood (F98.2)
polyphagia (R63.2)
F50.0 Anorexia nervosa
     Note:
    A disorder characterized by deliberate weight loss, induced and sustained by the patient. It
   occurs most commonly in adolescent girls and young women, but adolescent boys and young
  men may also be affected, as may children approaching puberty and older women up to the
 menopause. The disorder is associated with a specific psychopathology whereby a dread of
fatness and flabbiness of body contour persists as an intrusive overvalued idea, and the patients
impose a low weight threshold on themselves. There is usually undernutrition of varying
severity with secondary endocrine and metabolic changes and disturbances of bodily function.
The symptoms include restricted dietary choice, excessive exercise, induced vomiting and
purgation, and use of appetite suppressants and diuretics.
Excludes:
loss of appetite (R63.0):
•
 psychogenic (F50.8)
F50.1 Atypical anorexia nervosa
     Note:
    Disorders that fulfil some of the features of anorexia nervosa but in which the overall clinical
   picture does not justify that diagnosis. For instance, one of the key symptoms, such as
  amenorrhoea or marked dread of being fat, may be absent in the presence of marked weight loss
 and weight-reducing behaviour. This diagnosis should not be made in the presence of known
physical disorders associated with weight loss.
F50.2 Bulimia nervosa
     Note:
    A syndrome characterized by repeated bouts of overeating and an excessive preoccupation with
   the control of body weight, leading to a pattern of overeating followed by vomiting or use of
  purgatives. This disorder shares many psychological features with anorexia nervosa, including
 an overconcern with body shape and weight. Repeated vomiting is likely to give rise to
disturbances of body electrolytes and physical complications. There is often, but not always, a
history of an earlier episode of anorexia nervosa, the interval ranging from a few months to
several years.
Includes:
Bulimia NOS
Hyperorexia nervosa
F50.3 Atypical bulimia nervosa
     Note:
    Disorders that fulfil some of the features of bulimia nervosa, but in which the overall clinical
   picture does not justify that diagnosis. For instance, there may be recurrent bouts of overeating
  and overuse of purgatives without significant weight change, or the typical overconcern about
 body shape and weight may be absent.
F50.4 Overeating associated with other psychological disturbances
     Note:
    Overeating due to stressful events, such as bereavement, accident, childbirth, etc.
   Includes:
  Psychogenic overeating
 Excludes:
obesity (E66.-)
256
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F50.5
Vomiting associated with other psychological disturbances
Note:
Repeated vomiting that occurs in dissociative disorders (F44.-) and hypochondriacal disorder
(F45.2), and that is not solely due to conditions classified outside this chapter. This subcategory
may also be used in addition to O21.- (excessive vomiting in pregnancy) when emotional factors
are predominant in the causation of recurrent nausea and vomiting in pregnancy.
Includes:
Psychogenic vomiting
Excludes:
nausea (R11)
vomiting NOS (R11)
F50.8 Other eating disorders
     Includes:
    Pica in adults
   Psychogenic loss of appetite
  Excludes:
 pica of infancy and childhood (F98.3)
F50.9 
F51.3
Eating disorder, unspecified
F51
Nonorganic sleep disorders
Note:
Excludes:
In many cases, a disturbance of sleep is one of the symptoms of another disorder, either mental
or physical. Whether a sleep disorder in a given patient is an independent condition or simply
one of the features of another disorder classified elsewhere, either in this chapter or in others,
should be determined on the basis of its clinical presentation and course as well as on the
therapeutic considerations and priorities at the time of the consultation. Generally, if the sleep
disorder is one of the major complaints and is perceived as a condition in itself, the present code
should be used along with other pertinent diagnoses describing the psychopathology and
pathophysiology involved in a given case. This category includes only those sleep disorders in
which emotional causes are considered to be a primary factor, and which are not due to
identifiable physical disorders classified elsewhere.
sleep disorders (organic) (G47.-)
F51.0 Nonorganic insomnia
     Note:
    A condition of unsatisfactory quantity and/or quality of sleep, which persists for a considerable
   period of time, including difficulty falling asleep, difficulty staying asleep, or early final
  wakening. Insomnia is a common symptom of many mental and physical disorders, and should
 be classified here in addition to the basic disorder only if it dominates the clinical picture.
Excludes:
insomnia (organic) (G47.0)
F51.1 Nonorganic hypersomnia
     Note:
    Hypersomnia is defined as a condition of either excessive daytime sleepiness and sleep attacks
   (not accounted for by an inadequate amount of sleep) or prolonged transition to the fully aroused
  state upon awakening. In the absence of an organic factor for the occurrence of hypersomnia,
 this condition is usually associated with mental disorders.
Excludes:
hypersomnia (organic) (G47.1)
narcolepsy (G47.4)
F51.2 Nonorganic disorder of the sleep-wake schedule
     Note:
    A lack of synchrony between the sleep-wake schedule and the desired sleep-wake schedule for
   the individual's environment, resulting in a complaint of either insomnia or hypersomnia.
  Includes:
 Psychogenic inversion of:
•
 circadian rhythm
•
 nyctohemeral rhythm
•
 sleep rhythm
Excludes:
disorders of the sleep-wake schedule (organic) (G47.2)
F51.3 Sleepwalking [somnambulism]
     Note:
    A state of altered consciousness in which phenomena of sleep and wakefulness are combined.
   During a sleepwalking episode the individual arises from bed, usually during the first third of
  nocturnal sleep, and walks about, exhibiting low levels of awareness, reactivity, and motor skill.
 Upon awakening, there is usually no recall of the event.
257
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F51.4 Sleep terrors [night terrors]
     Note:
    Nocturnal episodes of extreme terror and panic associated with intense vocalization, motility,
   and high levels of autonomic discharge. The individual sits up or gets up, usually during the first
  third of nocturnal sleep, with a panicky scream. Quite often he or she rushes to the door as if
 trying to escape, although very seldom leaves the room. Recall of the event, if any, is very
limited (usually to one or two fragmentary mental images).
F51.5 Nightmares
     Note:
    Dream experiences loaded with anxiety or fear. There is very detailed recall of the dream
   content. The dream experience is very vivid and usually includes themes involving threats to
  survival, security, or self-esteem. Quite often there is a recurrence of the same or similar
 frightening nightmare themes. During a typical episode there is a degree of autonomic discharge
but no appreciable vocalization or body motility. Upon awakening the individual rapidly
becomes alert and oriented.
Includes:
Dream anxiety disorder
F51.8 Other nonorganic sleep disorders
F51.9 Nonorganic sleep disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Emotional sleep disorder NOS
F51.4
F52
Sexual dysfunction, not caused by organic disorder or disease
Note:
Excludes:
Sexual dysfunction covers the various ways in which an individual is unable to participate in a
sexual relationship as he or she would wish. Sexual response is a psychosomatic process and
both psychological and somatic processes are usually involved in the causation of sexual
dysfunction.
Dhat syndrome (F48.8)
F52.0 Lack or loss of sexual desire
     Note:
    Loss of sexual desire is the principal problem and is not secondary to other sexual difficulties,
   such as erectile failure or dyspareunia.
  Includes:
 Frigidity
Hypoactive sexual desire disorder
F52.1 Sexual aversion and lack of sexual enjoyment
     Note:
    Either the prospect of sexual interaction produces sufficient fear or anxiety that sexual activity
   is avoided (sexual aversion) or sexual responses occur normally and orgasm is experienced but
  there is a lack of appropriate pleasure (lack of sexual enjoyment).
 Includes:
Anhedonia (sexual)
F52.2 Failure of genital response
     Note:
    The principal problem in men is erectile dysfunction (difficulty in developing or maintaining an
   erection suitable for satisfactory intercourse). In women, the principal problem is vaginal
  dryness or failure of lubrication.
 Includes:
Female sexual arousal disorder
Male erectile disorder
Psychogenic impotence
Excludes:
impotence of organic origin (N48.4-)
F52.3 Orgasmic dysfunction
     Note:
    Orgasm either does not occur or is markedly delayed.
   Includes:
  Inhibited orgasm (male)(female)
 Psychogenic anorgasmy
F52.4 Premature ejaculation
     Note:
    The inability to control ejaculation sufficiently for both partners to enjoy sexual interaction.
F52.5 Nonorganic vaginismus
     Note:
    Spasm of the pelvic floor muscles that surround the vagina, causing occlusion of the vaginal
   opening. Penile entry is either impossible or painful.
  Includes:
 Psychogenic vaginismus
Excludes:
vaginismus (organic) (N94.2)
258
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F52.6
Nonorganic dyspareunia
Note:
Dyspareunia (or pain during sexual intercourse) occurs in both women and men. It can often be
attributed to local pathology and should then properly be categorized under the pathological
condition. This category is to be used only if there is no primary nonorganic sexual dysfunction
(e.g. vaginismus or vaginal dryness).
Includes:
Psychogenic dyspareunia
Excludes:
dyspareunia (organic) (N94.1)
F52.7 Excessive sexual drive
     Includes:
    Nymphomania
   Satyriasis
F52.8 Other sexual dysfunction, not caused by organic disorder or disease
F52.9 
F54
Unspecified sexual dysfunction, not caused by organic disorder or disease
F53
Mental and behavioural disorders associated with the puerperium, not
elsewhere classified
Note:
This category includes only mental disorders associated with the puerperium (commencing
within six weeks of delivery) that do not meet the criteria for disorders classified elsewhere in
this chapter, either because insufficient information is available, or because it is considered that
special additional clinical features are present that make their classification elsewhere
inappropriate.
F53.0 Mild mental and behavioural disorders associated with the puerperium, not elsewhere
     classified
    Includes:
   Depression:
  •
   postnatal NOS
  •
   postpartum NOS
F53.1 Severe mental and behavioural disorders associated with the puerperium, not elsewhere
     classified
    Includes:
   Puerperal psychosis NOS
F53.8 Other mental and behavioural disorders associated with the puerperium, not elsewhere
     classified
F53.9 Puerperal mental disorder, unspecified
F54
Psychological and behavioural factors associated with disorders or
diseases classified elsewhere
Note:
This category should be used to record the presence of psychological or behavioural influences
thought to have played a major part in the etiology of physical disorders which can be classified
to other chapters. Any resulting mental disturbances are usually mild, and often prolonged (such
as worry, emotional conflict, apprehension) and do not of themselves justify the use of any of
the categories in this chapter.
Includes:
Examples of the use of this category are:
•
asthma F54 and J45.-
•
dermatitis F54 and L23-L25
•
gastric ulcer F54 and K25.-
•
mucous colitis F54 and K58.-
•
ulcerative colitis F54 and K51.-
•
urticaria F54 and L50.-
Psychological factors affecting physical conditions
Use additional code, to identify the associated physical disorder.
Excludes:
tension-type headache (G44.2)
259
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F55
Abuse of non-dependence-producing substances
Note:
F55
Includes:
Excludes:
F59
Unspecified behavioural syndromes associated with physiological
disturbances and physical factors
Includes:
260
A wide variety of medicaments and folk remedies may be involved, but the particularly
important groups are: (a) psychotropic drugs that do not produce dependence, such as
antidepressants, (b) laxatives, and (c) analgesics that may be purchased without medical
prescription, such as aspirin and paracetamol.
Persistent use of these substances often involves unnecessary contacts with medical
professionals or supporting staff, and is sometimes accompanied by harmful physical effects of
the substances. Attempts to dissuade or forbid the use of the substance are often met with
resistance; for laxatives and analgesis this may be in spite of warnings about (or even the
development of) physical harm such as renal dysfunction or electrolyte disturbances. Although
it is usually clear that the patient has a strong motivation to take the substance, dependence or
withdrawal symptoms do no develop as in the case of the pyschoactive substances specified in
F10-F19.
Abuse of:
•
antacids
•
herbal or folk remedies
•
steroids or hormones
•
vitamins
Laxative habit
abuse of psychoactive substances (F10-F19)
Psychogenic physiological dysfunction NOS
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
Disorders of adult personality and behaviour
(F60-F69)
Note:
F60
F60.1
This block includes a variety of conditions and behaviour patterns of clinical significance which tend to be
persistent and appear to be the expression of the individual's characteristic lifestyle and mode of relating to
himself or herself and others. Some of these conditions and patterns of behaviour emerge early in the course of
individual development, as a result of both constitutional factors and social experience, while others are
acquired later in life. Specific personality disorders (F60.-), mixed and other personality disorders (F61.-), and
enduring personality changes (F62.-) are deeply ingrained and enduring behaviour patterns, manifesting as
inflexible responses to a broad range of personal and social situations. They represent extreme or significant
deviations from the way in which the average individual in a given culture perceives, thinks, feels and,
particularly, relates to others. Such behaviour patterns tend to be stable and to encompass multiple domains of
behaviour and psychological functioning. They are frequently, but not always, associated with various degrees
of subjective distress and problems of social performance.
Specific personality disorders
Note:
These are severe disturbances in the personality and behavioural tendencies of the individual;
not directly resulting from disease, damage, or other insult to the brain, or from another
psychiatric disorder; usually involving several areas of the personality; nearly always associated
with considerable personal distress and social disruption; and usually manifest since childhood
or adolescence and continuing throughout adulthood.
F60.0 Paranoid personality disorder
     Note:
    Personality disorder characterized by excessive sensitivity to setbacks, unforgiveness of insults;
   suspiciousness and a tendency to distort experience by misconstruing the neutral or friendly
  actions of others as hostile or contemptuous; recurrent suspicions, without justification,
 regarding the sexual fidelity of the spouse or sexual partner; and a combative and tenacious sense
of personal rights. There may be excessive self-importance, and there is often excessive self-
reference.
Includes:
Personality (disorder):
•
 expansive paranoid
•
 fanatic
•
 paranoid
•
 querulant
•
 sensitive paranoid
Excludes:
paranoia (F22.0):
•
 querulans (F22.8)
paranoid:
•
 psychosis (F22.0)
•
 schizophrenia (F20.0)
•
 state (F22.0)
F60.1 Schizoid personality disorder
     Note:
    Personality disorder characterized by withdrawal from affectional, social and other contacts with
   preference for fantasy, solitary activities, and introspection. There is a limited capacity to
  express feelings and to experience pleasure.
 Excludes:
Asperger's syndrome (F84.5)
delusional disorder F22.0)
schizoid disorder of childhood (F84.5)
schizophrenia (F20.-)
schizotypal disorder (F21)
261
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F60.2 Dissocial personality disorder
     Note:
    Personality disorder characterized by disregard for social obligations, and callous unconcern for
   the feelings of others. There is gross disparity between behaviour and the prevailing social
  norms. Behaviour is not readily modifiable by adverse experience, including punishment. There
 is a low tolerance to frustration and a low threshold for discharge of aggression, including
violence; there is a tendency to blame others, or to offer plausible rationalizations for the
behaviour bringing the patient into conflict with society.
Includes:
Personality (disorder):
•
 amoral
•
 antisocial
•
 asocial
•
 psychopathic
•
 sociopathic
Excludes:
conduct disorders (F91.-)
emotionally unstable personality disorder (F60.3)
F60.3 Emotionally unstable personality disorder
     Note:
    Personality disorder characterized by a definite tendency to act impulsively and without
   consideration of the consequences; the mood is unpredictable and capricious. There is a liability
  to outbursts of emotion and an incapacity to control the behavioural explosions. There is a
 tendency to quarrelsome behaviour and to conflicts with others, especially when impulsive acts
are thwarted or censored. Two types may be distinguished: the impulsive type, characterized
predominantly by emotional instability and lack of impulse control, and the borderline type,
characterized in addition by disturbances in self-image, aims, and internal preferences, by
chronic feelings of emptiness, by intense and unstable interpersonal relationships, and by a
tendency to self-destructive behaviour, including suicide gestures and attempts.
Includes:
Personality (disorder):
•
 aggressive
•
 borderline
•
 explosive
Excludes:
dissocial personality disorder (F60.2)
F60.4 Histrionic personality disorder
     Note:
    Personality disorder characterized by shallow and labile affectivity, self-dramatization,
   theatricality, exaggerated expression of emotions, suggestibility, egocentricity, self-indulgence,
  lack of consideration for others, easily hurt feelings, and continuous seeking for appreciation,
 excitement and attention.
Includes:
Personality (disorder):
•
 hysterical
•
 psychoinfantile
F60.5 Anankastic personality disorder
     Note:
    Personality disorder characterized by feelings of doubt, perfectionism, excessive
   conscientiousness, checking and preoccupation with details, stubbornness, caution, and rigidity.
  There may be insistent and unwelcome thoughts or impulses that do not attain the severity of an
 obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Includes:
Personality (disorder):
•
 compulsive
•
 obsessional
•
 obsessive-compulsive
Excludes:
obsessive-compulsive disorder (F42.-)
F60.6 Anxious [avoidant] personality disorder
     Note:
    Personality disorder characterized by feelings of tension and apprehension, insecurity and
   inferiority. There is a continuous yearning to be liked and accepted, a hypersensitivity to
  rejection and criticism with restricted personal attachments, and a tendency to avoid certain
 activities by habitual exaggeration of the potential dangers or risks in everyday situations.
F60.2
262
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F60.7
Dependent personality disorder
Note:
Personality disorder characterized by pervasive passive reliance on other people to make one's
major and minor life decisions, great fear of abandonment, feelings of helplessness and
incompetence, passive compliance with the wishes of elders and others, and a weak response to
the demands of daily life. Lack of vigour may show itself in the intellectual or emotional spheres;
there is often a tendency to transfer responsibility to others.
Includes:
Personality (disorder):
•
asthenic
•
inadequate
•
passive
•
self-defeating
F60.8 Other specific personality disorders
     Includes:
    Personality (disorder):
   •
    "haltlose" type
   •
    eccentric
   •
    immature
   •
    narcissistic
   •
    passive-aggressive
   •
    psychoneurotic
F60.9 
F62.0
Personality disorder, unspecified
Includes:
Character neurosis NOS
Pathological personality NOS
F61
Mixed and other personality disorders
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
F62
Enduring personality changes, not attributable to brain damage and disease
Note:
Excludes:
F62.0
This category is intended for personality disorders that are often troublesome but do not
demonstrate the specific pattern of symptoms that characterize the disorders described in F60.-.
As a result they are often more difficult to diagnose than the disorders in F60.-.
Examples include:
•
mixed personality disorders with features of several of the disorders in F60.- but without a
predominant set of symptoms that would allow a more specific diagnosis
•
troublesome personality changes, not classifiable to F60.- or F62.-, and regarded as secondary
to a main diagnosis of a coexisting affective or anxiety disorder.
accentuated personality traits (Z73.1)
Disorders of adult personality and behaviour that have developed in persons with no previous
personality disorder following exposure to catastrophic or excessive prolonged stress, or
following a severe psychiatric illness. These diagnoses should be made only when there is
evidence of a definite and enduring change in a person's pattern of perceiving, relating to, or
thinking about the environment and himself or herself. The personality change should be
significant and be associated with inflexible and maladaptive behaviour not present before the
pathogenic experience. The change should not be a direct manifestation of another mental
disorder or a residual symptom of any antecedent mental disorder.
personality and behavioural disorder due to brain disease, damage and dysfunction (F07.-)
Enduring personality change after catastrophic experience
Note:
Enduring personality change, present for at least two years, following exposure to catastrophic
stress. The stress must be so extreme that it is not necessary to consider personal vulnerability
in order to explain its profound effect on the personality. The disorder is characterized by a
hostile or distrustful attitude toward the world, social withdrawal, feelings of emptiness or
hopelessness, a chronic feeling of "being on edge" as if constantly threatened, and estrangement.
Post-traumatic stress disorder (F43.1) may precede this type of personality change.
Includes:
Personality change after:
•
concentration camp experiences
•
disasters
•
prolonged:
•
captivity with an imminent possibility of being killed
•
exposure to life-threatening situations such as being a victim of terrorism
•
torture
Excludes:
post-traumatic stress disorder (F43.1)
263
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F62.1 Enduring personality change after psychiatric illness
     Note:
    Personality change, persisting for at least two years, attributable to the traumatic experience of
   suffering from a severe psychiatric illness. The change cannot be explained by a previous
  personality disorder and should be differentiated from residual schizophrenia and other states of
 incomplete recovery from an antecedent mental disorder. This disorder is characterized by an
excessive dependence on and a demanding attitude towards others; conviction of being changed
or stigmatized by the illness, leading to an inability to form and maintain close and confiding
personal relationships and to social isolation; passivity, reduced interests, and diminished
involvement in leisure activities; persistent complaints of being ill, which may be associated
with hypochondriacal claims and illness behaviour; dysphoric or labile mood, not due to the
presence of a current mental disorder or antecedent mental disorder with residual affective
symptoms; and longstanding problems in social and occupational functioning.
F62.8 Other enduring personality changes
     Includes:
    Chronic pain personality syndrome
F62.9 Enduring personality change, unspecified
F62.1
F63
Habit and impulse disorders
Note:
Excludes:
This category includes certain disorders of behaviour that are not classifiable under other
categories. They are characterized by repeated acts that have no clear rational motivation, cannot
be controlled, and generally harm the patient's own interests and those of other people. The
patient reports that the behaviour is associated with impulses to action. The cause of these
disorders is not understood and they are grouped together because of broad descriptive
similarities, not because they are known to share any other important features.
habitual excessive use of alcohol or psychoactive substances (F10-F19)
impulse and habit disorders involving sexual behaviour (F65.-)
F63.0 Pathological gambling
     Note:
    The disorder consists of frequent, repeated episodes of gambling that dominate the patient's life
   to the detriment of social, occupational, material, and family values and commitments.
  Includes:
 Compulsive gambling
Excludes:
excessive gambling by manic patients (F30.-)
gambling:
•
 and betting NOS (Z72.6)
•
 in dissocial personality disorder (F60.2)
F63.1 Pathological fire-setting [pyromania]
     Note:
    Disorder characterized by multiple acts of, or attempts at, setting fire to property or other objects,
   without apparent motive, and by a persistent preoccupation with subjects related to fire and
  burning. This behaviour is often associated with feelings of increasing tension before the act, and
 intense excitement immediately afterwards.
Excludes:
fire-setting (by)(in):
•
 adult with dissocial personality disorder (F60.2)
•
 alcohol or psychoactive substance intoxication (F10-F19, with common fourth character .0)
•
 as the reason for observation for suspected mental disorder (Z03.2)
•
 conduct disorders (F91.-)
•
 organic mental disorders (F00-F09)
•
 schizophrenia (F20.-)
F63.2 Pathological stealing [kleptomania]
     Note:
    Disorder characterized by repeated failure to resist impulses to steal objects that are not acquired
   for personal use or monetary gain. The objects may instead be discarded, given away, or
  hoarded. This behaviour is usually accompanied by an increasing sense of tension before, and a
 sense of gratification during and immediately after, the act.
Excludes:
depressive disorder with stealing (F31-F33)
organic mental disorders (F00-F09)
shoplifting as the reason for observation for suspected mental disorder (Z03.2)
264
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F63.3
Trichotillomania
Note:
A disorder characterized by noticeable hair-loss due to a recurrent failure to resist impulses to
pull out hairs. The hair-pulling is usually preceded by mounting tension and is followed by a
sense of relief or gratification. This diagnosis should not be made if there is a pre-existing
inflammation of the skin, or if the hair-pulling is in response to a delusion or a hallucination.
Excludes:
stereotyped movement disorder with hair-plucking (F98.4)
F63.8 Other habit and impulse disorders
     Note:
    Other kinds of persistently repeated maladaptive behaviour that are not secondary to a
   recognized psychiatric syndrome, and in which it appears that the patient is repeatedly failing to
  resist impulses to carry out the behaviour. There is a prodromal period of tension with a feeling
 of release at the time of the act.
Includes:
Intermittent explosive disorder
F63.9 
F65.0
Habit and impulse disorder, unspecified
F64
Gender identity disorders
F64.0 Transsexualism
     Note:
    A desire to live and be accepted as a member of the opposite sex, usually accompanied by a sense
   of discomfort with, or inappropriateness of, one's anatomic sex, and a wish to have surgery and
  hormonal treatment to make one's body as congruent as possible with one's preferred sex.
F64.1 Dual-role transvestism
     Note:
    The wearing of clothes of the opposite sex for part of the individual's existence in order to enjoy
   the temporary experience of membership of the opposite sex, but without any desire for a more
  permanent sex change or associated surgical reassignment, and without sexual excitement
 accompanying the cross-dressing.
Includes:
Gender identity disorder of adolescence or adulthood, nontranssexual type
Excludes:
fetishistic transvestism (F65.1)
F64.2 Gender identity disorder of childhood
     Note:
    A disorder, usually first manifest during early childhood (and always well before puberty),
   characterized by a persistent and intense distress about assigned sex, together with a desire to be
  (or insistence that one is) of the other sex. There is a persistent preoccupation with the dress and
 activities of the opposite sex and repudiation of the individual's own sex. The diagnosis requires
a profound disturbance of the normal gender identity; mere tomboyishness in girls or girlish
behaviour in boys is not sufficient. Gender identity disorders in individuals who have reached or
are entering puberty should not be classified here but in F66.-.
Excludes:
egodystonic sexual orientation (F66.1)
sexual maturation disorder (F66.0)
F64.8 Other gender identity disorders
F64.9 Gender identity disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Gender-role disorder NOS
F65 Disorders of sexual preference
Includes:
F65.0
Fetishism
Note:
paraphilias
Reliance on some non-living object as a stimulus for sexual arousal and sexual gratification.
Many fetishes are extensions of the human body, such as articles of clothing or footwear. Other
common examples are characterized by some particular texture such as rubber, plastic or leather.
Fetish objects vary in their importance to the individual. In some cases they simply serve to
enhance sexual excitement achieved in ordinary ways (e.g. having the partner wear a particular
garment).
265
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F65.1 Fetishistic transvestism
     Note:
    The wearing of clothes of the opposite sex principally to obtain sexual excitement and to create
   the appearance of a person of the opposite sex. Fetishistic transvestism is distinguished from
  transsexual transvestism by its clear association with sexual arousal and the strong desire to
 remove the clothing once orgasm occurs and sexual arousal declines. It can occur as an earlier
phase in the development of transsexualism.
Includes:
Transvestic fetishism
F65.2 Exhibitionism
     Note:
    A recurrent or persistent tendency to expose the genitalia to strangers (usually of the opposite
   sex) or to people in public places, without inviting or intending closer contact. There is usually,
  but not invariably, sexual excitement at the time of the exposure and the act is commonly
 followed by masturbation.
F65.3 Voyeurism
     Note:
    A recurrent or persistent tendency to look at people engaging in sexual or intimate behaviour
   such as undressing. This is carried out without the observed people being aware, and usually
  leads to sexual excitement and masturbation.
F65.4 Paedophilia
     Note:
    A sexual preference for children, boys or girls or both, usually of prepubertal or early pubertal
   age.
F65.5 Sadomasochism
     Note:
    A preference for sexual activity which involves the infliction of pain or humiliation, or bondage.
   If the subject prefers to be the recipient of such stimulation this is called masochism; if the
  provider, sadism. Often an individual obtains sexual excitement from both sadistic and
 masochistic activities.
Includes:
Masochism
Sadism
F65.6 Multiple disorders of sexual preference
     Note:
    Sometimes more than one abnormal sexual preference occurs in one person and there is none of
   first rank. The most common combination is fetishism, transvestism and sadomasochism.
F65.8 Other disorders of sexual preference
     Note:
    A variety of other patterns of sexual preference and activity, including making obscene
   telephone calls, rubbing up against people for sexual stimulation in crowded public places,
  sexual activity with animals, and use of strangulation or anoxia for intensifying sexual
 excitement.
Includes:
Frotteurism
Necrophilia
F65.9 Disorder of sexual preference, unspecified
     Includes:
    Sexual deviation NOS
F65.1
F66
Psychological and behavioural disorders associated with sexual
development and orientation
Note:
Sexual orientation by itself is not to be regarded as a disorder.
F66.0 Sexual maturation disorder
     Note:
    The patient suffers from uncertainty about his or her gender identity or sexual orientation, which
   causes anxiety or depression. Most commonly this occurs in adolescents who are not certain
  whether they are homosexual, heterosexual or bisexual in orientation, or in individuals who,
 after a period of apparently stable sexual orientation (often within a longstanding relationship),
find that their sexual orientation is changing.
F66.1 Egodystonic sexual orientation
     Note:
    The gender identity or sexual preference (heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual, or prepubertal) is
   not in doubt, but the individual wishes it were different because of associated psychological and
  behavioural disorders, and may seek treatment in order to change it.
266
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F66.2
Sexual relationship disorder
Note:
The gender identity or sexual orientation (heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual) is responsible
for difficulties in forming or maintaining a relationship with a sexual partner.
F66.8 Other psychosexual development disorders
F66.9 
F69
Psychosexual development disorder, unspecified
F68
Other disorders of adult personality and behaviour
F68.0 Elaboration of physical symptoms for psychological reasons
     Note:
    Physical symptoms compatible with and originally due to a confirmed physical disorder, disease
   or disability become exaggerated or prolonged due to the psychological state of the patient. The
  patient is commonly distressed by this pain or disability, and is often preoccupied with worries,
 which may be justified, of the possibility of prolonged or progressive disability or pain.
Includes:
Compensation neurosis
F68.1 Intentional production or feigning of symptoms or disabilities, either physical or
     psychological [factitious disorder]
    Note:
   The patient feigns symptoms repeatedly for no obvious reason and may even inflict self-harm in
  order to produce symptoms or signs. The motivation is obscure and presumably internal with the
 aim of adopting the sick role. The disorder is often combined with marked disorders of
personality and relationships.
Includes:
Hospital hopper syndrome
Münchhausen's syndrome
Peregrinating patient
Excludes:
factitial dermatitis (L98.1)
person feigning illness (with obvious motivation) (Z76.5)
F68.8 Other specified disorders of adult personality and behaviour
     Includes:
    Character disorder NOS
   Relationship disorder NOS
F69
Unspecified disorder of adult personality and behaviour
267
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F70
Mental retardation
(F70-F79)
Note:
A condition of arrested or incomplete development of the mind, which is especially characterized by
impairment of skills manifested during the developmental period, skills which contribute to the overall level of
intelligence, i.e. cognitive, language, motor, and social abilities. Retardation can occur with or without any other
mental or physical condition.
Degrees of mental retardation are conventionally estimated by standardized intelligence tests. These can be
supplemented by scales assessing social adaptation in a given environment. These measures provide an
approximate indication of the degree of mental retardation. The diagnosis will also depend on the overall
assessment of intellectual functioning by a skilled diagnostician.
Intellectual abilities and social adaptation may change over time, and, however poor, may improve as a result
of training and rehabilitation. Diagnosis should be based on the current levels of functioning.
Use additional code, to identify associated conditions such as autism, other developmental disorders, epilepsy, conduct
disorders, or severe physical handicap.
F70
Mild mental retardation
Note:
Includes:
Approximate IQ range of 50 to 69 (in adults, mental age from 9 to under 12 years). Likely to
result in some learning difficulties in school. Many adults will be able to work and maintain good
social relationships and contribute to society.
feeble-mindedness
mild mental subnormality
F70.0 Mild mental retardation with the statement of no, or minimal, impairment of behaviour
F70.1 Mild mental retardation, significant impairment of behaviour requiring attention or treatment
F70.8 Mild mental retardation, other impairments of behaviour
F70.9 Mild mental retardation without mention of impairment of behaviour
F71
Moderate mental retardation
Note:
Includes:
Approximate IQ range of 35 to 49 (in adults, mental age from 6 to under 9 years). Likely to result
in marked developmental delays in childhood but most can learn to develop some degree of
independence in self-care and acquire adequate communication and academic skills. Adults will
need varying degrees of support to live and work in the community.
moderate mental subnormality
F71.0 Moderate mental retardation with the statement of no, or minimal, impairment of behaviour
F71.1 Moderate mental retardation, significant impairment of behaviour requiring attention or
     treatment
F71.8 Moderate mental retardation, other impairments of behaviour
F71.9 Moderate mental retardation without mention of impairment of behaviour
F72
Severe mental retardation
Note:
Includes:
Approximate IQ range of 20 to 34 (in adults, mental age from 3 to under 6 years). Likely to result
in continuous need of support.
severe mental subnormality
F72.0 Severe mental retardation with the statement of no, or minimal, impairment of behaviour
F72.1 Severe mental retardation, significant impairment of behaviour requiring attention or
     treatment
F72.8 Severe mental retardation, other impairments of behaviour
F72.9 Severe mental retardation without mention of impairment of behaviour
268
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F73
Profound mental retardation
Note:
Includes:
IQ under 20 (in adults, mental age below 3 years). Results in severe limitation in self-care,
continence, communication and mobility.
profound mental subnormality
F73.0 Profound mental retardation with the statement of no, or minimal, impairment of behaviour
F73.1 Profound mental retardation, significant impairment of behaviour requiring attention or
     treatment
F73.8 Profound mental retardation, other impairments of behaviour
F73.9 
F79.9
Profound mental retardation without mention of impairment of behaviour
F78
Other mental retardation
F78.0 Other mental retardation with the statement of no, or minimal, impairment of behaviour
F78.1 Other mental retardation, significant impairment of behaviour requiring attention or treatment
F78.8 Other mental retardation, other impairments of behaviour
F78.9 Other mental retardation without mention of impairment of behaviour
F79
Unspecified mental retardation
Includes:
mental:
•
deficiency NOS
•
subnormality NOS
F79.0 Unspecified mental retardation with the statement of no, or minimal, impairment of behaviour
F79.1 Unspecified mental retardation, significant impairment of behaviour requiring attention or
     treatment
F79.8 Unspecified mental retardation, other impairments of behaviour
F79.9 Unspecified mental retardation without mention of impairment of behaviour
269
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F80
Disorders of psychological development
(F80-F89)
Note:
F80
The disorders included in this block have in common: (a) onset invariably during infancy or childhood; (b)
impairment or delay in development of functions that are strongly related to biological maturation of the central
nervous system; and (c) a steady course without remissions and relapses. In most cases, the functions affected
include language, visuo-spatial skills, and motor coordination. Usually, the delay or impairment has been
present from as early as it could be detected reliably and will diminish progressively as the child grows older,
although milder deficits often remain in adult life.
Specific developmental disorders of speech and language
Note:
Disorders in which normal patterns of language acquisition are disturbed from the early stages
of development. The conditions are not directly attributable to neurological or speech
mechanism abnormalities, sensory impairments, mental retardation, or environmental factors.
Specific developmental disorders of speech and language are often followed by associated
problems, such as difficulties in reading and spelling, abnormalities in interpersonal
relationships, and emotional and behavioural disorders.
F80.0 Specific speech articulation disorder
     Note:
    A specific developmental disorder in which the child's use of speech sounds is below the
   appropriate level for its mental age, but in which there is a normal level of language skills.
  Includes:
 Developmental:
•
 phonological disorder
•
 speech articulation disorder
Dyslalia
Functional speech articulation disorder
Lalling
Excludes:
speech articulation impairment (due to):
•
 aphasia NOS (R47.0)
•
 apraxia (R48.2)
•
 hearing loss (H90-H91)
•
 mental retardation (F70-F79)
•
 with language developmental disorder:
•
 expressive (F80.1)
•
 receptive (F80.2)
F80.1 Expressive language disorder
     Note:
    A specific developmental disorder in which the child's ability to use expressive spoken language
   is markedly below the appropriate level for its mental age, but in which language comprehension
  is within normal limits. There may or may not be abnormalities in articulation.
 Includes:
Developmental dysphasia or aphasia, expressive type
Excludes:
acquired aphasia with epilepsy [Landau-Kleffner] (F80.3)
dysphasia and aphasia:
•
 NOS (R47.0)
•
 developmental, receptive type (F80.2)
elective mutism (F94.0)
mental retardation (F70-F79)
pervasive developmental disorders (F84.-)
270
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F80.2
Receptive language disorder
Note:
A specific developmental disorder in which the child's understanding of language is below the
appropriate level for its mental age. In virtually all cases expressive language will also be
markedly affected and abnormalities in word-sound production are common.
Includes:
Congenital auditory imperception
Developmental:
•
dysphasia or aphasia, receptive type
•
Wernicke's aphasia
Word deafness
Excludes:
acquired aphasia with epilepsy [Landau-Kleffner] (F80.3)
autism (F84.0-F84.1)
dysphasia and aphasia:
•
NOS (R47.0)
•
developmental, expressive type (F80.1)
elective mutism (F94.0)
language delay due to deafness (H90-H91)
mental retardation (F70-F79)
pervasive developmental disorders (F84.-)
F80.3 Acquired aphasia with epilepsy [Landau-Kleffner]
     Note:
    A disorder in which the child, having previously made normal progress in language
   development, loses both receptive and expressive language skills but retains general
  intelligence; the onset of the disorder is accompanied by paroxysmal abnormalities on the EEG,
 and in the majority of cases also by epileptic seizures. Usually the onset is between the ages of
three and seven years, with skills being lost over days or weeks. The temporal association
between the onset of seizures and loss of language is variable, with one preceding the other
(either way round) by a few months to two years. An inflammatory encephalitic process has been
suggested as a possible cause of this disorder. About two-thirds of patients are left with a more
or less severe receptive language deficit.
Excludes:
aphasia (due to):
•
 NOS (R47.0)
•
 autism (F84.0-F84.1)
•
 disintegrative disorders of childhood (F84.2-F84.3)
F80.8 Other developmental disorders of speech and language
     Includes:
    Lisping
F80.9 
F81.0
Developmental disorder of speech and language, unspecified
Includes:
Language disorder NOS
F81
Specific developmental disorders of scholastic skills
Note:
F81.0
Disorders in which the normal patterns of skill acquisition are disturbed from the early stages of
development. This is not simply a consequence of a lack of opportunity to learn, it is not solely
a result of mental retardation, and it is not due to any form of acquired brain trauma or disease.
Specific reading disorder
Note:
The main feature is a specific and significant impairment in the development of reading skills
that is not solely accounted for by mental age, visual acuity problems, or inadequate schooling.
Reading comprehension skill, reading word recognition, oral reading skill, and performance of
tasks requiring reading may all be affected. Spelling difficulties are frequently associated with
specific reading disorder and often remain into adolescence even after some progress in reading
has been made. Specific developmental disorders of reading are commonly preceded by a
history of disorders in speech or language development. Associated emotional and behavioural
disturbances are common during the school age period.
Includes:
"Backward reading"
Developmental dyslexia
Specific reading retardation
Excludes:
alexia NOS (R48.0)
dyslexia NOS (R48.0)
reading difficulties secondary to emotional disorders (F93.-)
271
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F81.1 Specific spelling disorder
     Note:
    The main feature is a specific and significant impairment in the development of spelling skills
   in the absence of a history of specific reading disorder, which is not solely accounted for by low
  mental age, visual acuity problems, or inadequate schooling. The ability to spell orally and to
 write out words correctly are both affected.
Includes:
Specific spelling retardation (without reading disorder)
Excludes:
agraphia NOS (R48.8)
spelling difficulties:
•
 associated with a reading disorder (F81.0)
•
 due to inadequate teaching (Z55.8)
F81.2 Specific disorder of arithmetical skills
     Note:
    Involves a specific impairment in arithmetical skills that is not solely explicable on the basis of
   general mental retardation or of inadequate schooling. The deficit concerns mastery of basic
  computational skills of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division rather than of the more
 abstract mathematical skills involved in algebra, trigonometry, geometry, or calculus.
Includes:
Developmental:
•
 acalculia
•
 arithmetical disorder
•
 Gerstmann's syndrome
Excludes:
acalculia NOS (R48.8)
arithmetical difficulties:
•
 associated with a reading or spelling disorder (F81.3)
•
 due to inadequate teaching (Z55.8)
F81.3 Mixed disorder of scholastic skills
     Note:
    An ill-defined residual category of disorders in which both arithmetical and reading or spelling
   skills are significantly impaired, but in which the disorder is not solely explicable in terms of
  general mental retardation or of inadequate schooling. It should be used for disorders meeting
 the criteria for both F81.2 and either F81.0 or F81.1.
Excludes:
specific:
•
 disorder of arithmetical skills (F81.2)
•
 reading disorder (F81.0)
•
 spelling disorder (F81.1)
F81.8 Other developmental disorders of scholastic skills
     Includes:
    Developmental expressive writing disorder
F81.9 Developmental disorder of scholastic skills, unspecified
     Includes:
    Knowledge acquisition disability NOS
   Learning:
  •
   disability NOS
  •
   disorder NOS
F81.1
F82
Specific developmental disorder of motor function
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
272
A disorder in which the main feature is a serious impairment in the development of motor
coordination that is not solely explicable in terms of general intellectual retardation or of any
specific congenital or acquired neurological disorder. Nevertheless, in most cases a careful
clinical examination shows marked neurodevelopmental immaturities such as choreiform
movements of unsupported limbs or mirror movements and other associated motor features, as
well as signs of impaired fine and gross motor coordination.
Clumsy child syndrome
Developmental:
•
coordination disorder
•
dyspraxia
abnormalities of gait and mobility (R26.-)
lack of coordination (R27.-)
secondary to mental retardation (F70-F79)
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F83
Mixed specific developmental disorders
Note:
F84
A residual category for disorders in which there is some admixture of specific developmental
disorders of speech and language, of scholastic skills, and of motor function, but in which none
predominates sufficiently to constitute the prime diagnosis. This mixed category should be used
only when there is a major overlap between each of these specific developmental disorders. The
disorders are usually, but not always, associated with some degree of general impairment of
cognitive functions. Thus, the category should be used when there are dysfunctions meeting the
criteria for two or more of F80.-, F81.- and F82.
F84.2
Pervasive developmental disorders
Note:
A group of disorders characterized by qualitative abnormalities in reciprocal social interactions
and in patterns of communication, and by a restricted, stereotyped, repetitive repertoire of
interests and activities. These qualitative abnormalities are a pervasive feature of the individual's
functioning in all situations.
Use additional code to identify any associated medical condition and mental retardation.
F84.0 Childhood autism
     Note:
    A type of pervasive developmental disorder that is defined by: (a) the presence of abnormal or
   impaired development that is manifest before the age of three years, and (b) the characteristic
  type of abnormal functioning in all the three areas of psychopathology: reciprocal social
 interaction, communication, and restricted, stereotyped, repetitive behaviour. In addition to
these specific diagnostic features, a range of other nonspecific problems are common, such as
phobias, sleeping and eating disturbances, temper tantrums, and (self-directed) aggression.
Includes:
Autistic disorder
Infantile:
•
 autism
•
 psychosis
Kanner's syndrome
Excludes:
autistic psychopathy (F84.5)
F84.1 Atypical autism
     Note:
    A type of pervasive developmental disorder that differs from childhood autism either in age of
   onset or in failing to fulfil all three sets of diagnostic criteria. This subcategory should be used
  when there is abnormal and impaired development that is present only after age three years, and
 a lack of sufficient demonstrable abnormalities in one or two of the three areas of
psychopathology required for the diagnosis of autism (namely, reciprocal social interactions,
communication, and restricted, stereotyped, repetitive behaviour) in spite of characteristic
abnormalities in the other area(s). Atypical autism arises most often in profoundly retarded
individuals and in individuals with a severe specific developmental disorder of receptive
language.
Includes:
Atypical childhood psychosis
Mental retardation with autistic features
Use additional code (F70-F79) to identify mental retardation.
F84.2 Rett's syndrome
     Note:
    A condition, so far found only in girls, in which apparently normal early development is
   followed by partial or complete loss of speech and of skills in locomotion and use of hands,
  together with deceleration in head growth, usually with an onset between seven and 24 months
 of age. Loss of purposive hand movements, hand-wringing stereotypies, and hyperventilation
are characteristic. Social and play development are arrested but social interest tends to be
maintained. Trunk ataxia and apraxia start to develop by age four years and choreoathetoid
movements frequently follow. Severe mental retardation almost invariably results.
273
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F84.3 Other childhood disintegrative disorder
     Note:
    A type of pervasive developmental disorder that is defined by a period of entirely normal
   development before the onset of the disorder, followed by a definite loss of previously acquired
  skills in several areas of development over the course of a few months. Typically, this is
 accompanied by a general loss of interest in the environment, by stereotyped, repetitive motor
mannerisms, and by autistic-like abnormalities in social interaction and communication. In some
cases the disorder can be shown to be due to some associated encephalopathy but the diagnosis
should be made on the behavioural features.
Includes:
Dementia infantilis
Disintegrative psychosis
Heller's syndrome
Symbiotic psychosis
Use additional code, to identify any associated neurological condition.
Excludes:
Rett's syndrome (F84.2)
F84.4 Overactive disorder associated with mental retardation and stereotyped movements
     Note:
    An ill-defined disorder of uncertain nosological validity. The category is designed to include a
   group of children with severe mental retardation (IQ below 34) who show major problems in
  hyperactivity and in attention, as well as stereotyped behaviours. They tend not to benefit from
 stimulant drugs (unlike those with an IQ in the normal range) and may exhibit a severe dysphoric
reaction (sometimes with psychomotor retardation) when given stimulants. In adolescence, the
overactivity tends to be replaced by underactivity (a pattern that is not usual in hyperkinetic
children with normal intelligence). This syndrome is also often associated with a variety of
developmental delays, either specific or global. The extent to which the behavioural pattern is a
function of low IQ or of organic brain damage is not known.
F84.5 Asperger's syndrome
     Note:
    A disorder of uncertain nosological validity, characterized by the same type of qualitative
   abnormalities of reciprocal social interaction that typify autism, together with a restricted,
  stereotyped, repetitive repertoire of interests and activities. It differs from autism primarily in
 the fact that there is no general delay or retardation in language or in cognitive development.
This disorder is often associated with marked clumsiness. There is a strong tendency for the
abnormalities to persist into adolescence and adult life. Psychotic episodes occasionally occur
in early adult life.
Includes:
Autistic psychopathy
Schizoid disorder of childhood
F84.8 Other pervasive developmental disorders
F84.9 Pervasive developmental disorder, unspecified
F84.3
F88
Other disorders of psychological development
Includes:
F89
Unspecified disorder of psychological development
Includes:
274
Developmental agnosia
Developmental disorder NOS
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
Behavioural and emotional disorders with onset usually
occurring in childhood and adolescence
(F90-F98)
F90
F91
Hyperkinetic disorders
Note:
Excludes:
A group of disorders characterized by an early onset (usually in the first five years of life), lack
of persistence in activities that require cognitive involvement, and a tendency to move from one
activity to another without completing any one, together with disorganized, ill-regulated, and
excessive activity. Several other abnormalities may be associated. Hyperkinetic children are
often reckless and impulsive, prone to accidents, and find themselves in disciplinary trouble
because of unthinking breaches of rules rather than deliberate defiance. Their relationships with
adults are often socially disinhibited, with a lack of normal caution and reserve. They are
unpopular with other children and may become isolated. Impairment of cognitive functions is
common, and specific delays in motor and language development are disproportionately
frequent. Secondary complications include dissocial behaviour and low self-esteem.
anxiety disorders (F41.-)
mood [affective] disorders (F30-F39)
pervasive developmental disorders (F84.-)
schizophrenia (F20.-)
F90.0 Disturbance of activity and attention
     Includes:
    Attention deficit
   disorder with hyperactivity
  hyperactivity disorder
 syndrome with hyperactivity
Excludes:
attention deficit disorder stated without hyperactivity (F98.8)
hyperkinetic disorder associated with conduct disorder (F90.1)
F90.1 Hyperkinetic conduct disorder
     Includes:
    Hyperkinetic disorder associated with conduct disorder
F90.8 Other hyperkinetic disorders
F90.9 Hyperkinetic disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Hyperkinetic:
   •
    reaction of childhood or adolescence NOS
   •
    syndrome NOS
F91
Conduct disorders
Note:
Excludes:
Disorders characterized by a repetitive and persistent pattern of dissocial, aggressive, or defiant
conduct. Such behaviour should amount to major violations of age-appropriate social
expectations; it should therefore be more severe than ordinary childish mischief or adolescent
rebelliousness and should imply an enduring pattern of behaviour (six months or longer).
Features of conduct disorder can also be symptomatic of other psychiatric conditions, in which
case the underlying diagnosis should be preferred.
Examples of the behaviours on which the diagnosis is based include excessive levels of fighting
or bullying, cruelty to other people or animals, severe destructiveness to property, fire-setting,
stealing, repeated lying, truancy from school and running away from home, unusually frequent
and severe temper tantrums, and disobedience. Any one of these behaviours, if marked, is
sufficient for the diagnosis, but isolated dissocial acts are not.
mood [affective] (F30-F39)
pervasive developmental disorders (F84.-)
schizophrenia (F20.-)
when associated with:
•
emotional disorders (F92.-)
•
hyperkinetic disorders (F90.1)
275
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F91.0 Conduct disorder confined to the family context
     Note:
    Conduct disorder involving dissocial or aggressive behaviour (and not merely oppositional,
   defiant, disruptive behaviour), in which the abnormal behaviour is entirely, or almost entirely,
  confined to the home and to interactions with members of the nuclear family or immediate
 household. The disorder requires that the overall criteria for F91.- be met; even severely
disturbed parent-child relationships are not of themselves sufficient for diagnosis.
F91.1 Unsocialized conduct disorder
     Note:
    Disorder characterized by the combination of persistent dissocial or aggressive behaviour
   (meeting the overall criteria for F91.- and not merely comprising oppositional, defiant,
  disruptive behaviour) with significant pervasive abnormalities in the individual's relationships
 with other children.
Includes:
Conduct disorder, solitary aggressive type
Unsocialized aggressive disorder
F91.2 Socialized conduct disorder
     Note:
    Disorder involving persistent dissocial or aggressive behaviour (meeting the overall criteria for
   F91.- and not merely comprising oppositional, defiant, disruptive behaviour) occurring in
  individuals who are generally well integrated into their peer group.
 Includes:
Conduct disorder, group type
Group delinquency
Offences in the context of gang membership
Stealing in company with others
Truancy from school
F91.3 Oppositional defiant disorder
     Note:
    Conduct disorder, usually occurring in younger children, primarily characterized by markedly
   defiant, disobedient, disruptive behaviour that does not include delinquent acts or the more
  extreme forms of aggressive or dissocial behaviour. The disorder requires that the overall criteria
 for F91.- be met; even severely mischievous or naughty behaviour is not in itself sufficient for
diagnosis. Caution should be employed before using this category, especially with older
children, because clinically significant conduct disorder will usually be accompanied by
dissocial or aggressive behaviour that goes beyond mere defiance, disobedience, or
disruptiveness.
F91.8 Other conduct disorders
F91.9 Conduct disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Childhood:
   •
    behavioural disorder NOS
   •
    conduct disorder NOS
F91.0
F92
Mixed disorders of conduct and emotions
Note:
F92.0
276
A group of disorders characterized by the combination of persistently aggressive, dissocial or
defiant behaviour with overt and marked symptoms of depression, anxiety or other emotional
upsets. The criteria for both conduct disorders of childhood (F9l.-) and emotional disorders of
childhood (F93.-) or an adult-type neurotic diagnosis (F40-F48) or a mood disorder (F30-F39)
must be met.
Depressive conduct disorder
Note:
This category requires the combination of conduct disorder (F91.-) with persistent and marked
depression of mood (F32.-), as demonstrated by symptoms such as excessive misery, loss of
interest and pleasure in usual activities, self-blame, and hopelessness; disturbances of sleep or
appetite may also be present.
Includes:
Conduct disorder in F91.- associated with depressive disorder in F32.-
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F92.8
F92.9
F93
Other mixed disorders of conduct and emotions
Note:
This category requires the combination of conduct disorder (F91.-) with persistent and marked
emotional symptoms such as anxiety, obsessions or compulsions, depersonalization or
derealization, phobias, or hypochondriasis.
Includes:
Conduct disorder in F91.- associated with:
•
emotional disorder in F93.-
•
neurotic disorder in F40-F48
F93.9
Mixed disorder of conduct and emotions, unspecified
Emotional disorders with onset specific to childhood
Note:
Excludes:
Mainly exaggerations of normal developmental trends rather than phenomena that are
qualitatively abnormal in themselves. Developmental appropriateness is used as the key
diagnostic feature in defining the difference between these emotional disorders, with onset
specific to childhood, and the neurotic disorders (F40-F48).
when associated with conduct disorder (F92.-)
F93.0 Separation anxiety disorder of childhood
     Note:
    Should be diagnosed when fear of separation constitutes the focus of the anxiety and when such
   anxiety first arose during the early years of childhood. It is differentiated from normal separation
  anxiety when it is of a degree (severity) that is statistically unusual (including an abnormal
 persistence beyond the usual age period), and when it is associated with significant problems in
social functioning.
Excludes:
mood [affective] disorders (F30-F39)
neurotic disorders (F40-F48)
phobic anxiety disorder of childhood (F93.1)
social anxiety disorder of childhood (F93.2)
F93.1 Phobic anxiety disorder of childhood
     Note:
    Fears in childhood that show a marked developmental phase specificity and arise (to some
   extent) in a majority of children, but that are abnormal in degree. Other fears that arise in
  childhood but that are not a normal part of psychosocial development (for example agoraphobia)
 should be coded under the appropriate category in section F40-F48.
Excludes:
generalized anxiety disorder (F41.1)
F93.2 Social anxiety disorder of childhood
     Note:
    In this disorder there is a wariness of strangers and social apprehension or anxiety when
   encountering new, strange, or socially threatening situations. This category should be used only
  where such fears arise during the early years, and are both unusual in degree and accompanied
 by problems in social functioning.
Includes:
Avoidant disorder of childhood or adolescence
F93.3 Sibling rivalry disorder
     Note:
    Some degree of emotional disturbance usually following the birth of an immediately younger
   sibling is shown by a majority of young children. A sibling rivalry disorder should be diagnosed
  only if the degree or persistence of the disturbance is both statistically unusual and associated
 with abnormalities of social interaction.
Includes:
Sibling jealousy
F93.8 Other childhood emotional disorders
     Includes:
    Identity disorder
   Overanxious disorder
  Excludes:
 gender identity disorder of childhood (F64.2)
F93.9 Childhood emotional disorder, unspecified
277
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F94
F94
Disorders of social functioning with onset specific to childhood and
adolescence
Note:
A somewhat heterogeneous group of disorders that have in common abnormalities in social
functioning which begin during the developmental period, but which (unlike the pervasive
developmental disorders) are not primarily characterized by an apparently constitutional social
incapacity or deficit that pervades all areas of functioning. In many instances, serious
environmental distortions or privations probably play a crucial role in etiology.
F94.0 Elective mutism
     Note:
    Characterized by a marked, emotionally determined selectivity in speaking, such that the child
   demonstrates a language competence in some situations but fails to speak in other (definable)
  situations. The disorder is usually associated with marked personality features involving social
 anxiety, withdrawal, sensitivity, or resistance.
Includes:
Selective mutism
Excludes:
pervasive developmental disorders (F84.-)
schizophrenia (F20.-)
specific developmental disorders of speech and language (F80.-)
transient mutism as part of separation anxiety in young children (F93.0)
F94.1 Reactive attachment disorder of childhood
     Note:
    Starts in the first five years of life and is characterized by persistent abnormalities in the child's
   pattern of social relationships that are associated with emotional disturbance and are reactive to
  changes in environmental circumstances (e.g. fearfulness and hypervigilance, poor social
 interaction with peers, aggression towards self and others, misery, and growth failure in some
cases). The syndrome probably occurs as a direct result of severe parental neglect, abuse, or
serious mishandling.
Use additional code to identify any associated failure to thrive or growth retardation.
Excludes:
Asperger's syndrome (F84.5)
disinhibited attachment disorder of childhood (F94.2)
maltreatment syndromes (T74.-)
normal variation in pattern of selective attachment sexual or physical abuse in childhood,
resulting in psychosocial problems (Z61.4-Z61.6)
F94.2 Disinhibited attachment disorder of childhood
     Note:
    A particular pattern of abnormal social functioning that arises during the first five years of life
   and that tends to persist despite marked changes in environmental circumstances, e.g. diffuse,
  nonselectively focused attachment behaviour, attention-seeking and indiscriminately friendly
 behaviour, poorly modulated peer interactions; depending on circumstances there may also be
associated emotional or behavioural disturbance.
Includes:
Affectionless psychopathy
Institutional syndrome
Excludes:
Asperger's syndrome (F84.5)
hospitalism in children (F43.2)
hyperkinetic disorders (F90.-)
reactive attachment disorder of childhood (F94.1)
F94.8 Other childhood disorders of social functioning
F94.9 Childhood disorder of social functioning, unspecified
278
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F95
Tic disorders
Note:
Syndromes in which the predominant manifestation is some form of tic. A tic is an involuntary,
rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movement (usually involving circumscribed muscle
groups) or vocal production that is of sudden onset and that serves no apparent purpose. Tics
tend to be experienced as irresistible but usually they can be suppressed for varying periods of
time, are exacerbated by stress, and disappear during sleep. Common simple motor tics include
only eye-blinking, neck-jerking, shoulder- shrugging, and facial grimacing. Common simple
vocal tics include throat-clearing, barking, sniffing, and hissing. Common complex tics include
hitting oneself, jumping, and hopping. Common complex vocal tics include the repetition of
particular words, and sometimes the use of socially unacceptable (often obscene) words
(coprolalia), and the repetition of one's own sounds or words (palilalia).
F95.0 Transient tic disorder
     Note:
    Meets the general criteria for a tic disorder but the tics do not persist longer than 12 months. The
   tics usually take the form of eye-blinking, facial grimacing, or head-jerking.
F95.1 Chronic motor or vocal tic disorder
     Note:
    Meets the general criteria for a tic disorder, in which there are motor or vocal tics (but not both),
   that may be either single or multiple (but usually multiple), and last for more than a year.
F95.2 Combined vocal and multiple motor tic disorder [de la Tourette]
     Note:
    A form of tic disorder in which there are, or have been, multiple motor tics and one or more vocal
   tics, although these need not have occurred concurrently. The disorder usually worsens during
  adolescence and tends to persist into adult life. The vocal tics are often multiple with explosive
 repetitive vocalizations, throat-clearing, and grunting, and there may be the use of obscene
words or phrases. Sometimes there is associated gestural echopraxia which may also be of an
obscene nature (copropraxia).
F95.8 Other tic disorders
F95.9 
F98.0
Tic disorder, unspecified
Includes:
Tic NOS
F98
Other behavioural and emotional disorders with onset usually occurring in
childhood and adolescence
Note:
Excludes:
F98.0
A heterogeneous group of disorders that share the characteristic of an onset in childhood but
otherwise differ in many respects. Some of the conditions represent well-defined syndromes but
others are no more than symptom complexes that need inclusion because of their frequency and
association with psychosocial problems, and because they cannot be incorporated into other
syndromes.
breath-holding spells (R06.8)
gender identity disorder of childhood (F64.2)
Kleine-Levin syndrome (G47.8)
obsessive-compulsive disorder (F42.-)
sleep disorders due to emotional causes (F51.-)
Nonorganic enuresis
Note:
A disorder characterized by involuntary voiding of urine, by day and by night, which is abnormal
in relation to the individual's mental age, and which is not a consequence of a lack of bladder
control due to any neurological disorder, to epileptic attacks, or to any structural abnormality of
the urinary tract. The enuresis may have been present from birth or it may have arisen following
a period of acquired bladder control. The enuresis may or may not be associated with a more
widespread emotional or behavioural disorder.
Includes:
Enuresis (primary)(secondary) of nonorganic origin
Functional enuresis
Psychogenic enuresis
Urinary incontinence of nonorganic origin
Excludes:
enuresis NOS (R32)
279
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
F98.1 Nonorganic encopresis
     Note:
    Repeated, voluntary or involuntary passage of faeces, usually of normal or near-normal
   consistency, in places not appropriate for that purpose in the individual's own sociocultural
  setting. The condition may represent an abnormal continuation of normal infantile incontinence,
 it may involve a loss of continence following the acquisition of bowel control, or it may involve
the deliberate deposition of faeces in inappropriate places in spite of normal physiological bowel
control. The condition may occur as a monosymptomatic disorder, or it may form part of a wider
disorder, especially an emotional disorder (F93.-) or a conduct disorder (F91.-).
Includes:
Functional encopresis
Incontinence of faeces of nonorganic origin
Psychogenic encopresis
Use additional code to identify the cause of any coexisting constipation.
Excludes:
encopresis NOS (R15)
F98.2 Feeding disorder of infancy and childhood
     Note:
    A feeding disorder of varying manifestations usually specific to infancy and early childhood. It
   generally involves food refusal and extreme faddiness in the presence of an adequate food
  supply, a reasonably competent caregiver, and the absence of organic disease. There may or may
 not be associated rumination (repeated regurgitation without nausea or gastrointestinal illness).
Includes:
Rumination disorder of infancy
Excludes:
anorexia nervosa and other eating disorders (F50.-)
feeding:
•
 difficulties and mismanagement (R63.3)
•
 problems of newborn (P92.-)
pica of infancy or childhood (F98.3)
F98.3 Pica of infancy and childhood
     Note:
    Persistent eating of non-nutritive substances (such as soil, paint chippings, etc.). It may occur as
   one of many symptoms that are part of a more widespread psychiatric disorder (such as autism),
  or as a relatively isolated psychopathological behaviour; only the latter is classified here. The
 phenomenon is most common in mentally retarded children and, if mental retardation is also
present, F70-F79 should be selected as the main diagnosis.
F98.4 Stereotyped movement disorders
     Note:
    Voluntary, repetitive, stereotyped, nonfunctional (and often rhythmic) movements that do not
   form part of any recognized psychiatric or neurological condition. When such movements occur
  as symptoms of some other disorder, only the overall disorder should be recorded. The
 movements that are of a non self-injurious variety include: body-rocking, head-rocking, hair-
plucking, hair-twisting, finger-flicking mannerisms, and hand-flapping. Stereotyped self-
injurious behaviour includes repetitive head-banging, face-slapping, eye-poking, and biting of
hands, lips or other body parts. All the stereotyped movement disorders occur most frequently
in association with mental retardation (when this is the case, both should be recorded). If eye-
poking occurs in a child with visual impairment, both should be coded: eye-poking under this
category and the visual condition under the appropriate somatic disorder code.
Includes:
Stereotype/habit disorder
Excludes:
abnormal involuntary movements (R25.-)
movement disorders of organic origin (G20-G25)
nail-biting (F98.8)
nose-picking (F98.8)
stereotypies that are part of a broader psychiatric condition (F00-F95)
thumb-sucking (F98.8)
tic disorders (F95.-)
trichotillomania (F63.3)
F98.5 Stuttering [stammering]
     Note:
    Speech that is characterized by frequent repetition or prolongation of sounds or syllables or
   words, or by frequent hesitations or pauses that disrupt the rhythmic flow of speech. It should be
  classified as a disorder only if its severity is such as to markedly disturb the fluency of speech.
 Excludes:
cluttering (F98.6)
tic disorders (F95.-)
F98.1
280
MENTAL AND BEHAVIOURAL DISORDERS (F00-F99)
F98.6
Cluttering
Note:
Excludes:
A rapid rate of speech with breakdown in fluency, but no repetitions or hesitations, of a severity
to give rise to diminished speech intelligibility. Speech is erratic and dysrhythmic, with rapid
jerky spurts that usually involve faulty phrasing patterns.
stuttering (F98.5)
tic disorders (F95.-)
F98.8 Other specified behavioural and emotional disorders with onset usually occurring in
     childhood and adolescence
    Includes:
   Attention deficit disorder without hyperactivity
  Excessive masturbation
 Nail-biting
Nose-picking
Thumb-sucking
F98.9 
F99
Unspecified behavioural and emotional disorders with onset usually occurring in childhood
and adolescence
Unspecified mental disorder
(F99)
F99
Mental disorder, not otherwise specified
Includes:
Excludes:
Mental illness NOS
organic mental disorder NOS (F06.9)
281
I
CHAPTER VI
Diseases of the nervous system
(G00-G99)
Excludes:
certain:
•
conditions originating in the perinatal period (P00-P96)
•
infectious and parasitic diseases (A00-B99)
complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O00-O99)
congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (Q00-Q99)
endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (E00-E90)
injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98)
neoplasms (C00-D48)
symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified (R00-R99)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
G00-G09
G10-G13
G20-G26
G30-G32
G35-G37
G40-G47
G50-G59
G60-G64
G70-G73
G80-G83
G90-G99
Inflammatory diseases of the central nervous system
Systemic atrophies primarily affecting the central nervous system
Extrapyramidal and movement disorders
Other degenerative diseases of the nervous system
Demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system
Episodic and paroxysmal disorders
Nerve, nerve root and plexus disorders
Polyneuropathies and other disorders of the peripheral nervous system
Diseases of myoneural junction and muscle
Cerebral palsy and other paralytic syndromes
Other disorders of the nervous system
Asterisk categories for this chapter are provided as follows:
G01*
G02*
G05*
G07*
G13*
G22*
G26*
G32*
G46*
G53*
G55*
G59*
G63*
G73*
G94*
G99*
Meningitis in bacterial diseases classified elsewhere
Meningitis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
Encephalitis, myelitis and encephalomyelitis in diseases classified elsewhere
Intracranial and intraspinal abscess and granuloma in diseases classified elsewhere
Systemic atrophies primarily affecting central nervous system in diseases classified elsewhere
Parkinsonism in diseases classified elsewhere
Extrapyramidal and movement disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Other degenerative disorders of nervous system in diseases classified elsewhere
Vascular syndromes of brain in cerebrovascular diseases (I60-I67†)
Cranial nerve disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Nerve root and plexus compressions in diseases classified elsewhere
Mononeuropathy in diseases classified elsewhere
Polyneuropathy in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of myoneural junction and muscle in diseases classified elsewhere
Other disorders of brain in diseases classified elsewhere
Other disorders of nervous system in diseases classified elsewhere
283
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G00
Inflammatory diseases of the central nervous system
(G00-G09)
G00
Bacterial meningitis, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Excludes:
arachnoiditis bacterial
leptomeningitis bacterial
meningitis bacterial
pachymeningitis bacterial
bacterial:
•
meningoencephalitis (G04.2)
•
meningomyelitis (G04.2)
G00.0 Haemophilus meningitis
     Includes:
    Meningitis due to Haemophilus influenzae
G00.1 Pneumococcal meningitis
     Includes:
    Meningitis due to Streptococcal pneumoniae
G00.2 Streptococcal meningitis
     Includes:
    Non-pneumococcal streptococci (Streptococcus, Group A) (Streptococcus, Group B)
G00.3 Staphylococcal meningitis
G00.8 Other bacterial meningitis
     Includes:
    Meningitis due to:
   •
    Escherichia coli
   •
    Friedländer bacillus
    •
     Klebsiella
G00.9 Bacterial meningitis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Meningitis:
   •
    purulent NOS
   •
    pyogenic NOS
   •
    suppurative NOS
G01*
Meningitis in bacterial diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Excludes:
G02*
Meningitis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
Excludes:
284
Meningitis (in):
•
anthrax (A22.8†)
•
gonococcal (A54.8†)
•
leptospirosis (A27.-†)
•
listerial (A32.1†)
•
Lyme disease (A69.2†)
•
meningococcal (A39.0†)
•
neurosyphilis (A52.1†)
•
salmonella infection (A02.2†)
•
syphilis:
•
congenital (A50.4†)
•
secondary (A51.4†)
•
tuberculous (A17.0†)
•
typhoid fever (A01.0†)
meningoencephalitis and meningomyelitis in bacterial diseases classified elsewhere (G05.0*)
meningoencephalitis and meningomyelitis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified
elsewhere (G05.1-G05.2*)
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
G02.0*
Meningitis in viral diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Meningitis (due to):
•
adenoviral (A87.1†)
•
enteroviral (A87.0†)
•
herpesviral [herpes simplex] (B00.3†)
•
infectious mononucleosis (B27.-†)
•
measles (B05.1†)
•
mumps (B26.1†)
•
rubella (B06.0†)
•
varicella [chickenpox] (B01.0†)
•
zoster (B02.1†)
G02.1* Meningitis in mycoses
      Includes:
     Meningitis (in):
    •
     candidal (B37.5†)
      •
       coccidioidomycosis (B38.4†)
        •
         cryptococcal (B45.1†)
G02.8* 
G03.9
Meningitis in other specified infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Meningitis due to:
•
 African trypanosomiasis (B56.-†)
  •
   Chagas' disease (chronic) (B57.4†)
G03
Meningitis due to other and unspecified causes
Includes:
arachnoiditis
leptomeningitis
meningitis
pachymeningitis
Excludes:
due to other and unspecified causes
meningoencephalitis (G04.-)
meningomyelitis (G04.-)
West Nile meningitis (A92.3)
G03.0 Nonpyogenic meningitis
     Includes:
    Nonbacterial meningitis
G03.1 Chronic meningitis
G03.2 Benign recurrent meningitis [Mollaret]
G03.8 Meningitis due to other specified causes
G03.9 Meningitis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Arachnoiditis (spinal) NOS
285
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G04
Encephalitis, myelitis and encephalomyelitis
Includes:
G04
Excludes:
acute ascending myelitis
meningoencephalitis
meningomyelitis
benign myalgic encephalomyelitis (G93.3)
encephalopathy:
•
NOS (G93.4)
•
alcoholic (G31.2)
•
toxic (G92)
multiple sclerosis (G35)
myelitis:
•
acute transverse (G37.3)
•
subacute necrotizing (G37.4)
West Nile encephalitis (A92.3)
West Nile encephalomyelitis (A92.3)
G04.0 Acute disseminated encephalitis
     Includes:
    Encephalitis postimmunization
   Encephalomyelitis postimmunization
  Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify vaccine.
G04.1 Tropical spastic paraplegia
G04.2 Bacterial meningoencephalitis and meningomyelitis, not elsewhere classified
G04.8 Other encephalitis, myelitis and encephalomyelitis
     Includes:
    Postinfectious encephalitis and encephalomyelitis NOS
G04.9 Encephalitis, myelitis and encephalomyelitis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Ventriculitis (cerebral) NOS
G05*
Encephalitis, myelitis and encephalomyelitis in diseases classified
elsewhere
Includes:
meningoencephalitis and meningomyelitis in diseases classified elsewhere
G05.0* Encephalitis, myelitis and encephalomyelitis in bacterial diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Encephalitis, myelitis or encephalomyelitis (in):
    •
     listerial (A32.1†)
      •
       meningococcal (A39.8†)
        •
         syphilis:
        •
         congenital (A50.4†)
          •
           late (A52.1†)
            •
             tuberculous (A17.8†)
G05.1* Encephalitis, myelitis and encephalomyelitis in viral diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Encephalitis, myelitis or encephalomyelitis (in):
    •
     adenoviral (A85.1†)
      •
       cytomegaloviral (B25.8†)
        •
         enteroviral (A85.0†)
          •
           herpesviral [herpes simplex] (B00.4†)
            •
             influenza (J09†, J10.8†,J11.8†)
                  •
                   measles (B05.0†)
                    •
                     mumps (B26.2†)
                      •
                       postchickenpox (B01.1†)
                        •
                         rubella (B06.0†)
                          •
                           zoster (B02.0†)
G05.2* Encephalitis, myelitis and encephalomyelitis in other infectious and parasitic diseases
      classified elsewhere
     Includes:
    Encephalitis, myelitis or encephalomyelitis in:
   •
    African trypanosomiasis (B56.-†)
     •
      Chagas' disease (chronic) (B57.4†)
       •
        naegleriasis (B60.2†)
         •
          toxoplasmosis (B58.2†)
           Eosinophilic meningoencephalitis (B83.2†)
286
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
G05.8*
G06
Encephalitis, myelitis and encephalomyelitis in other diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Encephalitis in systemic lupus erythematosus (M32.1†)
G09
Intracranial and intraspinal abscess and granuloma
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
G06.0 Intracranial abscess and granuloma
     Includes:
    Abscess (embolic)(of):
   •
    brain [any part]
   •
    cerebellar
   •
    cerebral
   •
    otogenic
   Intracranial abscess or granuloma:
  •
   epidural
  •
   extradural
  •
   subdural
G06.1 Intraspinal abscess and granuloma
     Includes:
    Abscess (embolic) of spinal cord [any part]
   Intraspinal abscess or granuloma:
  •
   epidural
  •
   extradural
  •
   subdural
G06.2 Extradural and subdural abscess, unspecified
G07*
Intracranial and intraspinal abscess and granuloma in diseases classified
elsewhere
Includes:
G08
Abscess of brain:
•
amoebic (A06.6†)
•
gonococcal (A54.8†)
•
tuberculous (A17.8†)
Schistosomiasis granuloma of brain (B65.-†)
Tuberculoma of:
•
brain (A17.8†)
•
meninges (A17.1†)
Intracranial and intraspinal phlebitis and thrombophlebitis
Includes:
Septic
•
•
•
•
•
Excludes:
G09
embolism
endophlebitis
phlebitis
thrombophlebitis
thrombosis
of intracranial or intraspinal venous sinuses and veins
intracranial phlebitis and thrombophlebitis complicating:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07,O08.7)
•
of nonpyogenic origin (I67.6)
•
pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O22.5)(O87.3)
nonpyogenic intraspinal phlebitis and thrombophlebitis (G95.1)
Sequelae of inflammatory diseases of central nervous system
Note:
Category G09 is to be used to indicate conditions whose primary classification is to G00-G08
(i.e. excluding those marked with an asterisk (*)) as the cause of sequelae, themselves
classifiable elsewhere. The "sequelae" include conditions specified as such or as late effects, or
those present one year or more after onset of the causal condition. For use of this category
reference should be made to the relevant morbidity and mortality coding rules and guidelines.
Not to be used for chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system. Code these to
current inflammatory disease of the central nervous system.
287
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G10
Systemic atrophies primarily affecting the central nervous
system
(G10-G14)
G10
Huntington's disease
Includes:
Excludes:
G11
Huntington's chorea
with Alzheimer's disease (G30.8)
Hereditary ataxia
Excludes:
cerebral palsy (G80.-)
hereditary and idiopathic neuropathy (G60.-)
metabolic disorders (E70-E90)
G11.0 Congenital nonprogressive ataxia
G11.1 Early-onset cerebellar ataxia
     Note:
    Onset usually by the mid-twenties.
   Includes:
  Early-onset cerebellar ataxia with:
 •
  essential tremor
 •
  myoclonus [Hunt's ataxia]
 •
  retained tendon reflexes
 Friedreich's ataxia (autosomal recessive)
Machado-Joseph Disease [MJD]
spinocerebellar ataxia
X-linked recessive spinocerebellar ataxia
G11.2 Late-onset cerebellar ataxia
     Note:
    Onset usually after the mid-twenties.
G11.3 Cerebellar ataxia with defective DNA repair
     Includes:
    Ataxia telangiectasia [Louis-Bar]
   Excludes:
  Cockayne's syndrome (Q87.1)
 xeroderma pigmentosum (Q82.1)
G11.4 Hereditary spastic paraplegia
G11.8 Other hereditary ataxias
G11.9 Hereditary ataxia, unspecified
     Includes:
    Garland-Moorhause syndrome
   Hereditary cerebellar:
  •
   ataxia NOS
  •
   degeneration (primary)
  •
   disease
  •
   syndrome
  Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome
 Torsten syndrome
G12 Spinal muscular atrophy and related syndromes
G12.0 Infantile spinal muscular atrophy, type I [Werdnig-Hoffman]
     Includes:
    Acute [inherited] infantile type I
G12.1 Other inherited spinal muscular atrophy
     Includes:
    Progressive bulbar palsy of childhood [Fazio-Londe]
   Spinal muscular atrophy:
  •
   adult form
  •
   childhood form, type II
  •
   distal
  •
   juvenile form, type III [Kugelberg-Welander]
  •
   scapuloperoneal form
288
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
G12.2
Motor neuron disease
Includes:
Familial motor neuron disease
Lateral sclerosis:
•
amyotrophic
•
primary
Progressive:
•
bulbar palsy
•
spinal muscular atrophy
G12.8 Other spinal muscular atrophies and related syndromes
G12.9 
G21.9
Spinal muscular atrophy, unspecified
G13*
Systemic atrophies primarily affecting central nervous system in diseases
classified elsewhere
G13.0* Paraneoplastic neuromyopathy and neuropathy
      Includes:
     Carcinomatous neuromyopathy (C00-C97†)
      Sensorial paraneoplastic neuropathy [Denny Brown] (C00-D48†)
G13.1* Other systemic atrophy primarily affecting central nervous system in neoplastic disease
      Includes:
     Paraneoplastic limbic encephalopathy (C00-D48†)
G13.2* Systemic atrophy primarily affecting central nervous system in myxoedema (E00.1†, E03.-†)
G13.8* Systemic atrophy primarily affecting central nervous system in other diseases classified
      elsewhere
G14
Postpolio syndrome
Includes:
Excludes:
Postpolio myelitic syndrome
sequelae of poliomyelitis (B91)
Extrapyramidal and movement disorders
(G20-G26)
G20
Parkinson's disease
Includes:
Excludes:
G21
Hemiparkinsonism
Paralysis agitans
Parkinsonism or Parkinson's disease:
•
NOS
•
idiopathic
•
primary
with Alzheimer's disease (G30.8)
Secondary parkinsonism
G21.0 Malignant neuroleptic syndrome
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
G21.1 Other drug-induced secondary parkinsonism
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
G21.2 Secondary parkinsonism due to other external agents
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify external agent.
G21.3 Postencephalitic parkinsonism
G21.4 Vascular parkinsonism
G21.8 Other secondary parkinsonism
G21.9 Secondary parkinsonism, unspecified
289
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G22*
Parkinsonism in diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
G22*
G23
Syphilitic parkinsonism (A52.1†)
Other degenerative diseases of basal ganglia
Excludes:
multi-system degeneration (G90.3)
G23.0 Hallervorden-Spatz disease
     Includes:
    Pigmentary pallidal degeneration
G23.1 Progressive supranuclear ophthalmoplegia [Steele-Richardson-Olszewski]
G23.2 Striatonigral degeneration
G23.8 Other specified degenerative diseases of basal ganglia
     Includes:
    Calcification of basal ganglia
G23.9 Degenerative disease of basal ganglia, unspecified
G24
Dystonia
Includes:
Excludes:
dyskinesia
athetoid cerebral palsy (G80.3)
G24.0 Drug-induced dystonia
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
G24.1 Idiopathic familial dystonia
     Includes:
    Idiopathic dystonia NOS
G24.2 Idiopathic nonfamilial dystonia
G24.3 Spasmodic torticollis
     Excludes:
    torticollis NOS (M43.6)
G24.4 Idiopathic orofacial dystonia
     Includes:
    Orofacial dyskinesia
G24.5 Blepharospasm
G24.8 Other dystonia
G24.9 Dystonia, unspecified
     Includes:
    Dyskinesia NOS
G25
Other extrapyramidal and movement disorders
G25.0 Essential tremor
     Includes:
    Familial tremor
   Excludes:
  tremor NOS (R25.1)
G25.1 Drug-induced tremor
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
G25.2 Other specified forms of tremor
     Includes:
    Intention tremor
G25.3 Myoclonus
     Includes:
    Drug-induced myoclonus
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
  Excludes:
 facial myokymia (G51.4)
myoclonic epilepsy (G40.-)
G25.4 Drug-induced chorea
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
290
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
G25.5
Other chorea
Includes:
Chorea NOS
Excludes:
chorea NOS with heart involvement (I02.0)
Huntington's chorea (G10)
rheumatic chorea (I02.-)
Sydenham's chorea (I02.-)
G25.6 Drug-induced tics and other tics of organic origin
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
    Excludes:
   de la Tourette's syndrome (F95.2)
  tic NOS (F95.9)
G25.8 Other specified extrapyramidal and movement disorders
     Includes:
    Restless legs syndrome
   Stiff-man syndrome
G25.9 
G26*
Extrapyramidal and movement disorder, unspecified
G26*
Extrapyramidal and movement disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
291
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G30
Other degenerative diseases of the nervous system
(G30-G32)
G30
Alzheimer's disease
Includes:
senile and presenile forms
Use additional code (F00.-*) to identify any associated dementia.
Excludes:
senile:
•
degeneration of brain NEC (G31.1)
•
dementia NOS (F03)
senility NOS (R54)
G30.0 Alzheimer's disease with early onset
     Note:
    Onset before the age of 65
G30.1 Alzheimer's disease with late onset
     Note:
    Onset after the age of 65
G30.8 Other Alzheimer's disease
     Includes:
    Alzheimer's with:
   •
    Huntington's disease
   •
    Parkinson's disease
   •
    Pick's disease
   Atypical Alzheimer's disease
  Use additional code to identify dementia in Alzheimer's disease, atypical or mixed type (F00.2* )
G30.9 Alzheimer's disease, unspecified
G31
Other degenerative diseases of nervous system, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
Reye's syndrome (G93.7)
G31.0 Circumscribed brain atrophy
     Includes:
    Frontotemporal dementia (FTD)
   Pick's disease
  Progressive isolated aphasia
 Excludes:
with Alzheimer's disease (G30.8)
G31.1 Senile degeneration of brain, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    Alzheimer's disease (G30.-)
   senility NOS (R54)
G31.2 Degeneration of nervous system due to alcohol
     Includes:
    Alcoholic:
   •
    cerebellar:
   •
    ataxia
   •
    degeneration
   •
    cerebral degeneration
   •
    encephalopathy
   Dysfunction of autonomic nervous system due to alcohol
G31.8 Other specified degenerative diseases of nervous system
     Includes:
    Grey-matter degeneration [Alpers]
   Lewy body(ies) (dementia) (disease)
  Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy (myoencephalopathy)
 Subacute necrotizing encephalopathy [Leigh]
G31.9 Degenerative disease of nervous system, unspecified
292
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
G32*
Other degenerative disorders of nervous system in diseases classified
elsewhere
G32.0* G32.8* 
G32.8*
Subacute combined degeneration of spinal cord in diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Subacute combined degeneration of spinal cord in vitamin B 12 deficiency (E53.8†)
Other specified degenerative disorders of nervous system in diseases classified elsewhere
293
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G35
Demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system
(G35-G37)
G35
Multiple sclerosis
Includes:
G36
Multiple sclerosis (of):
•
NOS
•
brain stem
•
cord
•
disseminated
•
generalized
Other acute disseminated demyelination
Excludes:
postinfectious encephalitis and encephalomyelitis NOS (G04.8)
G36.0 Neuromyelitis optica [Devic]
     Includes:
    Demyelination in optic neuritis
   Excludes:
  optic neuritis NOS (H46)
G36.1 Acute and subacute haemorrhagic leukoencephalitis [Hurst]
G36.8 Other specified acute disseminated demyelination
G36.9 Acute disseminated demyelination, unspecified
G37
Other demyelinating diseases of central nervous system
G37.0 Diffuse sclerosis
     Includes:
    Periaxial encephalitis
   Schilder's disease
  Excludes:
 adrenoleukodystrophy [Addison-Schilder] (E71.3)
G37.1 Central demyelination of corpus callosum
G37.2 Central pontine myelinolysis
G37.3 Acute transverse myelitis in demyelinating disease of central nervous system
     Includes:
    Acute transverse myelitis NOS
   Excludes:
  multiple sclerosis (G35)
 neuromyelitis optica [Devic] (G36.0)
G37.4 Subacute necrotizing myelitis
G37.5 Concentric sclerosis [Baló]
G37.8 Other specified demyelinating diseases of central nervous system
G37.9 Demyelinating disease of central nervous system, unspecified
294
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
Episodic and paroxysmal disorders
(G40-G47)
G40
G40.3
Epilepsy
Use additional code to identify any associated condition(s) or cause.
Use additional code to identify any associated status epilepticus (G41.-)
Excludes:
conversion disorder with seizures (F44.5)
convulsion NOS (R56.88)
convulsions of newborn (P90)
epileptic psychosis (F06.8)
febrile convulsions (R56.0-)
isolated (first) seizure (R56.88)
Landau-Kleffner syndrome (F80.3)
seizure (convulsive) NOS (R56.88)
Todd's paralysis (postepileptic) (G83.8)
G40.0 Localization-related (focal)(partial) idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with seizures
     of localized onset
    Includes:
   Benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal EEG spikes
  Childhood epilepsy with occipital EEG paroxysms
G40.00o Localization-related (focal) (partial) idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with seizures
       of localized onset, not stated as intractable
G40.01o Localization-related (focal) (partial) idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with seizures
       of localized onset, intractable
G40.1 Localization-related (focal)(partial) symptomatic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with
     simple partial seizures
    Includes:
   Attacks without alteration of consciousness
  Simple partial seizures developing into secondarily generalized seizures
G40.10o Localization-related (focal) (partial) symptomatic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with
       simple partial seizures, not stated as intractable
G40.11o Localization-related (focal) (partial) symptomatic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with
       simple partial seizures, intractable
G40.2 Localization-related (focal)(partial) symptomatic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with
     complex partial seizures
    Includes:
   Attacks with alteration of consciousness, often with automatisms
  Complex partial seizures developing into secondarily generalized seizures
G40.20o Localization-related (focal) (partial) symptomatic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with
       complex partial seizures, not stated as intractable
G40.21o Localization-related (focal) (partial) symptomatic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with
       complex partial seizures, intractable
G40.3 Generalized idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes
     Includes:
    Benign:
   •
    myoclonic epilepsy in infancy
   •
    neonatal convulsions (familial)
   Childhood absence epilepsy [pyknolepsy]
  Epilepsy with grand mal seizures on awakening
 Juvenile:
•
 absence epilepsy
•
 myoclonic epilepsy [impulsive petit mal]
Nonspecific epileptic seizures:
•
 atonic
•
 clonic
•
 myoclonic
•
 tonic
•
 tonic-clonic
295
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G40.30o 
G40.30o
Generalized idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes, not stated as intractable
G40.31o Generalized idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes, intractable
G40.4 Other generalized epilepsy and epileptic syndromes
     Includes:
    Epilepsy with:
   •
    myoclonic absences
   •
    myoclonic-astatic seizures
   Infantile spasms
  Lennox-Gastaut syndrome
 MERRF [myoclonus epilepsy ragged red fibre syndrome]
Salaam attacks
Symptomatic early myoclonic encephalopathy
West's syndrome
G40.40o Other generalized idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes, not stated as intractable
G40.41o Other generalized idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes, intractable
G40.5 Special epileptic syndromes
     Includes:
    Epilepsia partialis continua [Kozhevnikof]
   Epileptic seizures related to:
  •
   alcohol
  •
   drugs
  •
   hormonal changes
  •
   sleep deprivation
  •
   stress
  Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
 Excludes:
epileptic seizure related to psychoactive substance withdrawal (F10-F19 with common fourth
characters .3 and .4)
G40.50o Special epileptic syndromes, not stated as intractable
G40.51o Special epileptic syndromes, intractable
G40.6 Grand mal seizures, unspecified (with or without petit mal)
     Note:
    This category should be used only for those conditions in which there is no additional
   information available that would allow appropriate classification in one of the categories G40.0-
  G40.5.
 Includes:
Grand mal seizures NOS
Tonic-clonic seizures (generalized) (NOS)
G40.60o Grand mal seizures, unspecified (with or without petit mal), not stated as intractable
G40.61o Grand mal seizures, unspecified (with or without petit mal), intractable
G40.7 Petit mal, unspecified, without grand mal seizures
     Note:
    Category G40.7 should be used only when there is insufficient information to allow the
   condition to be classified in G40.3-
  Includes:
 Absence seizures (generalized) (NOS)
Petit mal seizure NOS
G40.70o Petit mal, unspecified, without grand mal seizures, not stated as intractable
G40.71o Petit mal, unspecified, without grand mal seizures, intractable
G40.8 Other epilepsy
     Includes:
    Epilepsies and epileptic syndromes undetermined as to whether they are focal or generalized
G40.80o Other epilepsy, not stated as intractable
G40.81o Other epilepsy, intractable
296
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
G40.9
Epilepsy, unspecified
Includes:
Epileptic:
•
convulsions NOS
•
fits NOS
•
seizures NOS
Excludes:
convulsion (convulsive) disorder (R56.80)
convulsive seizure or fit NOS (R56.88)
febrile convulsions (seizures) (R56.0-)
G40.90o Epilepsy, unspecified, not stated as intractable
G40.91o 
G44.0
Epilepsy, unspecified, intractable
G41
Status epilepticus
Use additional code to identify any underlying convulsions, seizures or epileptic syndromes
G41.0 Grand mal status epilepticus
     Includes:
    Tonic-clonic status epilepticus
   Excludes:
  epilepsia partialis continua [Kozhevnikof] (G40.5)
G41.1 Petit mal status epilepticus
     Includes:
    Epileptic absence status
G41.2 Complex partial status epilepticus
G41.8 Other status epilepticus
G41.9 Status epilepticus, unspecified
G43
Migraine
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
Excludes:
headache NOS (R51)
G43.0 Migraine without aura [common migraine]
G43.1 Migraine with aura [classical migraine]
     Includes:
    Migraine:
   •
    aura without headache
   •
    basilar
   •
    equivalents
   •
    familial hemiplegic
   •
    with:
   •
    acute-onset aura
   •
    prolonged aura
   •
    typical aura
G43.2 Status migrainosus
G43.3 Complicated migraine
G43.8 Other migraine
     Includes:
    Ophthalmoplegic migraine
   Retinal migraine
G43.9 Migraine, unspecified
G44
Other headache syndromes
Excludes:
G44.0
atypical facial pain (G50.1)
headache NOS (R51)
trigeminal neuralgia (G50.0)
Cluster headache syndrome
Includes:
Chronic paroxysmal hemicrania
Cluster headache:
•
chronic
•
episodic
297
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G44.1 
G44.1
Vascular headache, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Vascular headache NOS
G44.2 Tension-type headache
     Includes:
    Chronic tension-type headache
   Episodic tension headache
  Tension headache NOS
G44.3 Chronic post-traumatic headache
G44.4 Drug-induced headache, not elsewhere classified
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
G44.8 Other specified headache syndromes
G45
Transient cerebral ischaemic attacks and related syndromes
Excludes:
neonatal cerebral ischaemia (P91.0)
G45.0 Vertebro-basilar artery syndrome
G45.1 Carotid artery syndrome (hemispheric)
G45.2 Multiple and bilateral precerebral artery syndromes
G45.3 Amaurosis fugax
G45.4 Transient global amnesia
     Excludes:
    amnesia NOS (R41.3)
G45.8 Other transient cerebral ischaemic attacks and related syndromes
     Includes:
    Subclavian steal syndrome
G45.9 Transient cerebral ischaemic attack, unspecified
     Includes:
    Spasm of cerebral artery
   Transient cerebral ischaemia NOS
  Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
 mellitus.
G46*
Vascular syndromes of brain in cerebrovascular diseases (I60-I67†)
G46.0* Middle cerebral artery syndrome (I66.0†)
G46.1* Anterior cerebral artery syndrome (I66.1†)
G46.2* Posterior cerebral artery syndrome (I66.2†)
G46.3* Brain stem stroke syndrome (I60-I67†)
        Includes:
       Syndrome:
      •
       Benedikt
      •
       Claude
      •
       Foville
      •
       Millard-Gubler
      •
       Wallenberg
      •
       Weber
G46.4* Cerebellar stroke syndrome (I60-I67†)
G46.5* Pure motor lacunar syndrome (I60-I67†)
G46.6* Pure sensory lacunar syndrome (I60-I67†)
G46.7* Other lacunar syndromes (I60-I67†)
G46.8* Other vascular syndromes of brain in cerebrovascular diseases (I60-I67†)
G47
Other sleep disorders
Excludes:
298
nightmares (F51.5)
nonorganic sleep disorders (F51.-)
sleep terrors (F51.4)
sleepwalking (F51.3)
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
G47.0 Disorders of initiating and maintaining sleep [insomnias]
G47.1 Disorders of excessive somnolence [hypersomnias]
G47.2 Disorders of the sleep-wake schedule
     Includes:
    Delayed sleep phase syndrome
   Irregular sleep-wake pattern
G47.3 Sleep apnoea
     Excludes:
    pickwickian syndrome (E66.2)
   sleep apnoea of newborn (P28.3)
G47.30o Sleep apnoea, obstructed
G47.31o Sleep apnoea, central
       Includes:
      Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome [CCHS]
     Nocturnal hypoventilation syndrome
    Ondine's curse
   Sleep hypopnea
G47.38o Other sleep apnoea
       Includes:
      Sleep apnoea:
     •
      of mixed etiology (obstructive with central)
     •
      unspecified
G47.4 Narcolepsy and cataplexy
G47.8 Other sleep disorders
     Includes:
    Kleine-Levin syndrome
G47.9 Sleep disorder, unspecified
G47.9
299
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G50
Nerve, nerve root and plexus disorders
(G50-G59)
Excludes:
G50
current traumatic nerve, nerve root and plexus disorders - see nerve injury by body region
neuralgia NOS (M79.2)
neuritis NOS (M79.2)
peripheral neuritis in pregnancy (O26.8)
radiculitis NOS (M54.1)
Disorders of trigeminal nerve
Includes:
disorders of 5th cranial nerve
G50.0 Trigeminal neuralgia
     Includes:
    Syndrome of paroxysmal facial pain
   Tic douloureux
G50.1 Atypical facial pain
G50.8 Other disorders of trigeminal nerve
     Excludes:
    gustatory sweating in diabetes mellitus (E10.42/G99.0*) (E11.42/G99.0*) (E13.42/G99.0*)
   (E14.42/G99.0*)
G50.9 Disorder of trigeminal nerve, unspecified
G51
Facial nerve disorders
Includes:
disorders of 7th cranial nerve
G51.0 Bell's palsy
     Includes:
    Facial palsy
G51.1 Geniculate ganglionitis
     Excludes:
    postherpetic geniculate ganglionitis (B02.2)
G51.2 Melkersson's syndrome
     Includes:
    Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome
G51.3 Clonic hemifacial spasm
G51.4 Facial myokymia
G51.8 Other disorders of facial nerve
G51.9 Disorder of facial nerve, unspecified
G52
Disorders of other cranial nerves
Excludes:
disorders of:
•
acoustic [8th] nerve (H93.3)
•
optic [2nd] nerve (H46,H47.0)
paralytic strabismus due to nerve palsy (H49.0-H49.2)
G52.0 Disorders of olfactory nerve
     Includes:
    Disorder of 1st cranial nerve
G52.1 Disorders of glossopharyngeal nerve
     Includes:
    Disorder of 9th cranial nerve
   Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
G52.2 Disorders of vagus nerve
     Includes:
    Disorder of pneumogastric [10th] nerve
G52.3 Disorders of hypoglossal nerve
     Includes:
    Disorder of 12th cranial nerve
G52.7 Disorders of multiple cranial nerves
     Includes:
    Polyneuritis cranialis
G52.8 Disorders of other specified cranial nerves
300
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
G52.9
G53*
Cranial nerve disorder, unspecified
Cranial nerve disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
G53.0* Postzoster neuralgia (B02.2†)
        Includes:
       Postherpetic:
      •
       geniculate ganglionitis
      •
       trigeminal neuralgia
G53.1* Multiple cranial nerve palsies in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere (A00-
      B99†)
G53.2* Multiple cranial nerve palsies in sarcoidosis (D86.8†)
G53.3* Multiple cranial nerve palsies in neoplastic disease (C00-D48†)
G53.8* 
G56
Other cranial nerve disorders in other diseases classified elsewhere
G54
Nerve root and plexus disorders
Excludes:
current traumatic nerve root and plexus disorders - see nerve injury by body region
intervertebral disc disorders (M50-M51)
neuralgia or neuritis NOS (M79.2)
neuritis or radiculitis:
•
brachial NOS (M54.1)
•
lumbar NOS (M54.1)
•
lumbosacral NOS (M54.1)
•
thoracic NOS (M54.1)
radiculitis NOS (M54.1)
radiculopathy NOS (M54.1)
spondylosis (M47.-)
G54.0 Brachial plexus disorders
     Includes:
    Thoracic outlet syndrome
G54.1 Lumbosacral plexus disorders
G54.2 Cervical root disorders, not elsewhere classified
G54.3 Thoracic root disorders, not elsewhere classified
G54.4 Lumbosacral root disorders, not elsewhere classified
G54.5 Neuralgic amyotrophy
     Includes:
    Parsonage-Aldren-Turner syndrome
   Shoulder-girdle neuritis
G54.6 Phantom limb syndrome with pain
G54.7 Phantom limb syndrome without pain
     Includes:
    Phantom limb syndrome NOS
G54.8 Other nerve root and plexus disorders
G54.9 Nerve root and plexus disorder, unspecified
G55*
Nerve root and plexus compressions in diseases classified elsewhere
G55.0* Nerve root and plexus compressions in neoplastic disease (C00-D48†)
G55.1* Nerve root and plexus compressions in intervertebral disc disorders (M50-M51†)
G55.2* Nerve root and plexus compressions in spondylosis (M47.-†)
G55.3* Nerve root and plexus compressions in other dorsopathies (M45-M46†, M48.-†, M53-M54†)
G55.8* Nerve root and plexus compressions in other diseases classified elsewhere
G56
Mononeuropathies of upper limb
Excludes:
current traumatic nerve disorder - see nerve injury by body region
301
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G56.0 Carpal tunnel syndrome
     Excludes:
    carpal tunnel syndrome in diabetes mellitus (E10.40/G59.0*) (E11.40/G59.0*) (E13.40/G59.0*)
   (E14.40/G59.0*)
G56.1 Other lesions of median nerve
G56.2 Lesion of ulnar nerve
     Includes:
    Cubital tunnel syndrome
   Tardy ulnar nerve palsy
  Ulnar nerve entrapment
 Excludes:
ulnar nerve compression or entrapment in diabetes mellitus (E10.40/G59.0*) (E11.40/G59.0*)
(E13.40/G59.0*) (E14.40/G59.0*)
G56.3 Lesion of radial nerve
G56.4 Causalgia of upper limb
G56.8 Other mononeuropathies of upper limb
     Includes:
    Interdigital neuroma of upper limb
G56.9 Mononeuropathy of upper limb, unspecified
G56.0
G57
Mononeuropathies of lower limb
Excludes:
current traumatic nerve disorder - see nerve injury by body region
G57.0 Lesion of sciatic nerve
     Excludes:
    sciatica:
   •
    NOS (M54.3)
   •
    attributed to intervertebral disc disorder (M51.1)
G57.1 Meralgia paraesthetica
     Includes:
    Lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh syndrome
G57.2 Lesion of femoral nerve
G57.3 Lesion of lateral popliteal nerve
     Includes:
    Peroneal nerve palsy
G57.4 Lesion of medial popliteal nerve
G57.5 Tarsal tunnel syndrome
G57.6 Lesion of plantar nerve
     Includes:
    Morton's metatarsalgia
G57.7o Causalgia of lower limb
G57.8 Other mononeuropathies of lower limb
     Includes:
    Interdigital neuroma of lower limb
G57.9 Mononeuropathy of lower limb, unspecified
     Includes:
    nerve entrapment syndrome, lower extremity
G58
Other mononeuropathies
G58.0 Intercostal neuropathy
G58.7 Mononeuritis multiplex
G58.8 Other specified mononeuropathies
G58.9 Mononeuropathy, unspecified
     Includes:
    Nerve entrapment syndrome, other and unspecified site
G59*
Mononeuropathy in diseases classified elsewhere
G59.0* Diabetic mononeuropathy (E10-E14† with common fourth character .4)
G59.8* Other mononeuropathies in diseases classified elsewhere
302
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
Polyneuropathies and other disorders of the peripheral
nervous system
(G60-G64)
Excludes:
G60
G62.8
neuralgia NOS (M79.2)
neuritis NOS (M79.2)
peripheral neuritis in pregnancy (O26.8)
radiculitis NOS (M54.1)
Hereditary and idiopathic neuropathy
G60.0 Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy
     Includes:
    Disease:
   •
    Charcot-Marie-Tooth
   •
    Déjerine-Sottas
    Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy, types I-IV
   Hypertrophic neuropathy of infancy
  Peroneal muscular atrophy (axonal type)(hypertrophic type)
 Roussy-Lévy syndrome
G60.1 Refsum's disease
G60.2 Neuropathy in association with hereditary ataxia
G60.3 Idiopathic progressive neuropathy
G60.8 Other hereditary and idiopathic neuropathies
     Includes:
    Morvan's disease
   Nelaton's syndrome
  Sensory neuropathy:
 •
  dominantly inherited
 •
  recessively inherited
G60.9 Hereditary and idiopathic neuropathy, unspecified
G61
Inflammatory polyneuropathy
G61.0 Guillain-Barré syndrome
      Includes:
     Acute (post-)infective polyneuritis
    Miller Fisher syndrome
G61.1 Serum neuropathy
     Includes:
    Serum neuritis (due to injection of foreign protein, antiserum, or antitoxin of animal origin)
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
G61.8 Other inflammatory polyneuropathies
G61.9 Inflammatory polyneuropathy, unspecified
G62
Other polyneuropathies
G62.0 Drug-induced polyneuropathy
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
G62.1 Alcoholic polyneuropathy
G62.2 Polyneuropathy due to other toxic agents
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify toxic agent.
G62.8 Other specified polyneuropathies
     Includes:
    Chronic inflammatory demyelinizing polyneuropathy
   Radiation-induced polyneuropathy
  Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
303
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G62.9
G62.9
G63*
Polyneuropathy, unspecified
Includes:
Neuropathy NOS
Polyneuropathy in diseases classified elsewhere
G63.0* Polyneuropathy in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Polyneuropathy (in):
    •
     diphtheria (A36.8†)
      •
       infectious mononucleosis (B27.-†)
        •
         leprosy (A30.-†)
          •
           Lyme disease (A69.2†)
            •
             mumps (B26.8†)
              •
               postherpetic (B02.2†)
                •
                 syphilis, late (A52.1†):
                  •
                   congenital (A50.4†)
                    •
                     tuberculous (A17.8†)
G63.1* Polyneuropathy in neoplastic disease (C00-D48†)
G63.2* Diabetic polyneuropathy (E10-E14† with common fourth character .4)
G63.3* Polyneuropathy in other endocrine and metabolic diseases (E00-E07†, E15-E16†, E20-E34†,
            E70-E89†)
G63.4* Polyneuropathy in nutritional deficiency (E40-E64†)
G63.5* Polyneuropathy in systemic connective tissue disorders (M30-M35†)
G63.6* Polyneuropathy in other musculoskeletal disorders (M00-M25†, M40-M96†)
G63.8* Polyneuropathy in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Uraemic neuropathy (N18.5†)
G64
Other disorders of peripheral nervous system
Includes:
304
Disorder of peripheral nervous system NOS
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
Diseases of myoneural junction and muscle
(G70-G73)
G70
G71.1
Myasthenia gravis and other myoneural disorders
Excludes:
botulism (A05.1)
myasthenia gravis in (with) diabetic neuropathy (E10.40/G73.0*) (E11.40/G73.0*) (E13.40/
G73.0*) (E14.40/G73.0*)
transient neonatal myasthenia gravis (P94.0)
G70.0 Myasthenia gravis
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
G70.1 Toxic myoneural disorders
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify toxic agent.
G70.2 Congenital and developmental myasthenia
G70.8 Other specified myoneural disorders
G70.9 Myoneural disorder, unspecified
G71
Primary disorders of muscles
Excludes:
arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (Q74.3)
metabolic disorders (E70-E90)
myositis (M60.-)
G71.0 Muscular dystrophy
     Includes:
    Muscular dystrophy:
   •
    autosomal recessive, childhood type, resembling Duchenne or Becker
   •
    benign [Becker]
   •
    benign scapuloperoneal with early contractures [Emery-Dreifuss]
   •
    distal
   •
    facioscapulohumeral
   •
    limb-girdle
   •
    ocular
   •
    oculopharyngeal
   •
    scapuloperoneal
   •
    severe [Duchenne]
   Excludes:
  congenital muscular dystrophy:
 •
  NOS (G71.2)
 •
  with specific morphological abnormalities of the muscle fibre (G71.2)
G71.1 Myotonic disorders
     Includes:
    Dystrophia myotonica [Steinert]
   Myotonia:
  •
   chondrodystrophic
  •
   congenita:
  •
   NOS
  •
   dominant [Thomsen]
  •
   recessive [Becker]
  •
   drug-induced
  •
   symptomatic
  Neuromyotonia [Isaacs]
 Paramyotonia congenita
Pseudomyotonia
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
305
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G71.2 Congenital myopathies
     Includes:
    Congenital muscular dystrophy:
   •
    NOS
   •
    with specific morphological abnormalities of the muscle fibre
   Disease:
  •
   central core
  •
   minicore
  •
   multicore
  Fibre-type disproportion
 Myopathy:
•
 myotubular (centronuclear)
•
 nemaline
G71.3 Mitochondrial myopathy, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    MELAS [mitochondrial encephalopathy lactic acidosis stroke-like episode syndrome]
   Use additional code to identify mitochondrial (DNA) deletion (Q99.8)
G71.8 Other primary disorders of muscles
G71.9 Primary disorder of muscle, unspecified
     Includes:
    Hereditary myopathy NOS
G71.2
G72
Other myopathies
Excludes:
arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (Q74.3)
dermatopolymyositis (M33.-)
ischaemic infarction of muscle (M62.2)
myositis (M60.-)
polymyositis (M33.2)
G72.0 Drug-induced myopathy
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
G72.1 Alcoholic myopathy
G72.2 Myopathy due to other toxic agents
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify toxic agent.
G72.3 Periodic paralysis
     Includes:
    Periodic paralysis (familial):
   •
    hyperkalaemic
   •
    hypokalaemic
   •
    myotonic
   •
    normokalaemic
G72.4 Inflammatory myopathy, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Inclusion body myositis [IBM]
G72.8 Other specified myopathies
G72.9 Myopathy, unspecified
306
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
G73*
Disorders of myoneural junction and muscle in diseases classified
elsewhere
G73.0* G73.1* Lambert-Eaton syndrome (C80.-†)
G73.2* Other myasthenic syndromes in neoplastic disease (C00-D48†)
G73.3* Myasthenic syndromes in other diseases classified elsewhere
G73.4* Myopathy in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
G73.5* Myopathy in endocrine diseases
      Includes:
     Myopathy in:
    •
     hyperparathyroidism (E21.0-E21.3†)
      •
       hypoparathyroidism (E20.-†)
        Thyrotoxic myopathy (E05.-†)
G73.6* Myopathy in metabolic diseases
      Includes:
     Myopathy in:
    •
     glycogen storage disease (E74.0†)
      •
       lipid storage disorders (E75.-†)
G73.7* 
G73.7*
Myasthenic syndromes in endocrine diseases
Includes:
Myasthenic syndromes in:
•
 diabetic amyotrophy (E10-E14† with common fourth character .4)
  •
   thyrotoxicosis [hyperthyroidism] (E05.-†)
Myopathy in other diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Myopathy in:
•
 rheumatoid arthritis (M05-M06†)
  •
   scleroderma (M34.8†)
    •
     sicca syndrome [Sjögren] (M35.0†)
       •
        systemic lupus erythematosus (M32.1†)
307
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G80
Cerebral palsy and other paralytic syndromes
(G80-G83)
G80
Cerebral palsy
Excludes:
hereditary spastic paraplegia (G11.4)
G80.0 Spastic quadriplegic cerebral palsy
     Includes:
    Congenital spastic paralysis (cerebral)
   Spastic tetraplegic cerebral palsy
G80.1 Spastic diplegic cerebral palsy
     Includes:
    Spastic cerebral palsy NOS
G80.2 Spastic hemiplegic cerebral palsy
G80.3 Dyskinetic cerebral palsy
     Includes:
    Athetoid cerebral palsy
   Dystonic cerebral palsy
G80.4 Ataxic cerebral palsy
G80.8 Other cerebral palsy
     Includes:
    Mixed cerebral palsy syndromes
G80.9 Cerebral palsy, unspecified
     Includes:
    Cerebral palsy NOS
G81
Hemiplegia
Note:
Excludes:
For primary coding, this category is to be used only when hemiplegia (complete) (incomplete)
is reported without further specification, or is stated to be old or longstanding but of unspecified
cause. The category is also for use in multiple coding to identify these types of hemiplegia
resulting from any cause.
congenital cerebral palsy (G80.-)
spastic hemiplegic cerebral palsy (G80.2)
G81.0 Flaccid hemiplegia
G81.00o Flaccid hemiplegia of dominant side
G81.01o Flaccid hemiplegia of non-dominant side
G81.09o Flaccid hemiplegia of unspecified [unilateral] side
G81.1 Spastic hemiplegia
G81.10o Spastic hemiplegia of dominant side
G81.11o Spastic hemiplegia of non-dominant side
G81.19o Spastic hemiplegia of unspecified [unilateral] side
G81.9 Hemiplegia, unspecified
G81.90o Hemiplegia of unspecified type of dominant side
G81.91o Hemiplegia of unspecified type of non-dominant side
G81.99o Hemiplegia of unspecified type of unspecified [unilateral] side
       Includes:
      Hemiplegia, NOS
308
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
G82
Paraplegia and tetraplegia
Note:
Excludes:
G82.0
For primary coding, this category is to be used only when the listed conditions are reported
without further specification, or are stated to be old or longstanding but of unspecified cause.
The category is also for use in multiple coding to identify these conditions resulting from any
cause.
congenital cerebral palsy (G80.-)
G82.3
Flaccid paraplegia
G82.0 Flaccid paraplegia Cervical Level, Thoracic level, Lumbar level,
                         includes: includes: includes: level
                         cervicothoracic thoracolumbar unspecified
G82.01 Flaccid paraplegia, complete G82.011o G82.012o G82.013o
G82.02 Flaccid paraplegia, incomplete G82.021o G82.022o G82.023o
G82.09 Flaccid paraplegia, unspecified G82.091o G82.092o G82.093o
Thoracic level, Lumbar level,
includes: includes: level
thoracolumbar unspecified
G82.1
Spastic paraplegia
Excludes:
Hereditary spastic paraplegia (G11.4)
G82.1 Spastic paraplegia
Cervical level,
includes:
cervicothoracic
G82.11 Spastic paraplegia,complete G82.111o G82.112o G82.113o
G82.12 Spastic paraplegia, incomplete G82.121o G82.122o G82.123o
G82.19 Spastic paraplegia, unspecified G82.191o G82.192o G82.193o
G82.2
Paraplegia, unspecified
Includes:
Paralysis of both lower limbs NOS
Paraplegia NOS
G82.2 Paraplegia, unspecified Cervical level, Thoracic level, Lumbar level:
                              includes: includes: includes: level
                              cervicothoracic thoracolumbar unspecified
G82.21 Paraplegia of unspecified type, G82.211o G82.212o G82.213o
complete 
G82.22 G82.221o G82.222o G82.223o
Paraplegia of unspecified type, 
incomplete 
G82.29 G82.291o G82.292o G82.293o
Paraplegia of unspecified type, 
unspecified 
G82.3
Flaccid quadriplegia
Includes:
Flaccid tetraplegia NOS
G82.3 Flaccid quadriplegia At cervical spine At cervical spine
                           level C1 to C4 level C5 to C7,
                                         includes: level
                                        unspecified
G82.31 Flaccid quadriplegia, complete G82.310o G82.311o
G82.32 Flaccid quadriplegia, incomplete G82.320o G82.321o
G82.39 Flaccid quadriplegia, unspecified G82.390o G82.391o
309
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G82.4
G82.4
Spastic quadriplegia
Includes:
Spastic tetraplegia NOS
G82.4 Spastic quadriplegia At cervical spine At cervical spine
                           level C1 to C4 level C5 to C7,
                                         includes: level
                                        unspecified
G82.41 Spastic quadriplegia, complete G82.410o G82.411o
G82.42 Spastic quadriplegia, incomplete G82.420o G82.421o
G82.49 Spastic quadriplegia, unspecified G82.490o G82.491o
G82.5 Quadriplegia, unspecified At cervical spine At cervical spine
                                level C1 to C4 level C5 to C7,
                                              includes: level
                                             unspecified
G82.51 Quadriplegia, unspecified type, G82.510o G82.511o
complete 
G82.52 Quadriplegia, unspecified type, G82.520o G82.521o
incomplete 
G82.59 Quadriplegia, unspecified type, G82.590o G82.591o
unspecified 
G82.5
G83
Quadriplegia, unspecified
Includes:
Tetraplegia NOS
Other paralytic syndromes
Note:
Includes:
For primary coding, this category is to be used only when the listed conditions are reported
without further specification, or are stated to be old or longstanding but of unspecified cause.
The category is also for use in multiple coding to identify these conditions resulting from any
cause.
paralysis (complete)(incomplete), except as in G80-G82
G83.0 Diplegia of upper limbs
     Includes:
    Diplegia (upper)
   Paralysis of both upper limbs
G83.1 Monoplegia of lower limb
     Includes:
    Paralysis of lower limb
G83.2 Monoplegia of upper limb
     Includes:
    Paralysis of upper limb
G83.20o Monoplegia of upper limb on dominant side
G83.21o Monoplegia of upper limb on non-dominant side
G83.22o Monoplegia of upper limb on unspecified [unilateral] side
G83.3 Monoplegia, unspecified
G83.4 Cauda equina syndrome
     Includes:
    Neurogenic bladder due to cauda equina syndrome
   Excludes:
  cord bladder NOS (G95.8)
G83.5o Locked-in state
      Includes:
     Locked-in syndrome
G83.8 Other specified paralytic syndromes
     Includes:
    Todd's paralysis (postepileptic)
G83.9 Paralytic syndrome, unspecified
310
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
Other disorders of the nervous system
(G90-G99)
G90
G93.2
Disorders of autonomic nervous system
Excludes:
dysfunction of autonomic nervous system due to alcohol (G31.2)
G90.0 Idiopathic peripheral autonomic neuropathy
     Includes:
    Carotid sinus syncope
G90.1 Familial dysautonomia [Riley-Day]
G90.2 Horner's syndrome
     Includes:
    Bernard(-Horner) syndrome
G90.3 Multi-system degeneration
     Includes:
    Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension [Shy-Drager]
   Excludes:
  orthostatic hypotension NOS (I95.1)
G90.4 Autonomic dysreflexia
G90.8 Other disorders of autonomic nervous system
G90.9 Disorder of autonomic nervous system, unspecified
G91
Hydrocephalus
Includes:
Excludes:
acquired hydrocephalus
hydrocephalus:
•
congenital (Q03.-)
•
due to congenital toxoplasmosis (P37.1)
G91.0 Communicating hydrocephalus
     Includes:
    Non-obstructive hydrocephalus
   Excludes:
  normal pressure hydrocephalus with dementia, gait disturbance and urinary incontinence
 (G91.2)
G91.1 Obstructive hydrocephalus
G91.2 Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
G91.3 Post-traumatic hydrocephalus, unspecified
G91.8 Other hydrocephalus
G91.9 Hydrocephalus, unspecified
G92
Toxic encephalopathy
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify toxic agent.
G93
Other disorders of brain
G93.0 Cerebral cysts
     Includes:
    Arachnoid cyst
   Porencephalic cyst, acquired
  Excludes:
 acquired periventricular cysts of newborn (P91.1)
congenital cerebral cysts (Q04.6)
G93.1 Anoxic brain damage, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    complicating:
   •
    abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07,O08.8)
   •
    pregnancy, labour or delivery (O29.2, O74.3, O89.2O89.2)
   •
    surgical and medical care (T80-T88)
   neonatal anoxia (P21.9)
G93.2 Benign intracranial hypertension
     Excludes:
    hypertensive encephalopathy (I67.4)
311
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G93.3 Postviral fatigue syndrome
     Includes:
    Benign myalgic encephalomyelitis
   Chronic fatigue syndrome
  Excludes:
 fatigue syndrome NOS (F48.0)
G93.4 Encephalopathy, unspecified
     Excludes:
    encephalopathy:
   •
    alcoholic (G31.2)
   •
    toxic (G92)
G93.5 Compression of brain
     Includes:
    Compression
   Herniation
G93.3
Excludes:
of brain (stem)
traumatic compression of brain (diffuse) (S06.2-):
•
focal (S06.3-)
G93.6 Cerebral oedema
     Excludes:
    cerebral oedema:
   •
    due to birth injury (P11.0)
   •
    traumatic (S06.1)
G93.7 Reye's syndrome
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
G93.8 Other specified disorders of brain
G93.80o Metabolic encephalopathy
       Includes:
      Septic encephalopathy
     Excludes:
    anoxic brain damage, not elsewhere classified (G93.1)
   toxic (metabolic) encephalopathy (G92)
G93.81o Neurologically determined death
       Includes:
      Brain death to identify continued use of healthcare facility resources
G93.88o Other specified disorders of brain
       Includes:
      Post-radiation encephalopathy
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause
G93.9 Disorder of brain, unspecified
G94*
Other disorders of brain in diseases classified elsewhere
G94.0* Hydrocephalus in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere (A00-B99†)
G94.1* Hydrocephalus in neoplastic disease (C00-D48†)
G94.2* Hydrocephalus in other diseases classified elsewhere
G94.8* Other specified disorders of brain in diseases classified elsewhere
G95
Other diseases of spinal cord
Excludes:
myelitis (G04.-)
G95.0 Syringomyelia and syringobulbia
G95.1 Vascular myelopathies
     Includes:
    Acute infarction of spinal cord (embolic)(nonembolic)
   Arterial thrombosis of spinal cord
  Haematomyelia
 Nonpyogenic intraspinal phlebitis and thrombophlebitis
Oedema of spinal cord
Subacute necrotic myelopathy
Excludes:
intraspinal phlebitis and thrombophlebitis, except non-pyogenic (G08)
G95.2 Cord compression, unspecified
312
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (G00-G99)
G95.8
G95.9
G96
Other specified diseases of spinal cord
Includes:
Cord bladder NOS
Myelopathy:
•
drug-induced
•
radiation-induced
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify external agent.
Excludes:
neurogenic bladder:
•
NOS (N31.9)
•
due to cauda equina syndrome (G83.4)
neuromuscular dysfunction of bladder without mention of spinal cord lesion (N31.-)
G99.8*
Disease of spinal cord, unspecified
Includes:
Myelopathy NOS
Other disorders of central nervous system
G96.0 Cerebrospinal fluid leak
G96.00o Cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea (leak)
G96.01o Cerebrospinal fluid otorrhea (leak)
G96.02o Cerebrospinal fluid leak within cranium
G96.08o Other cerebrospinal fluid leak
       Includes:
      CSF leak of spine (from spinal puncture)
G96.09o Cerebrospinal fluid leak unspecified
       Includes:
      Cerebrospinal fluid leak NOS
G96.1 Disorders of meninges, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Meningeal adhesions (cerebral)(spinal)
G96.8 Other specified disorders of central nervous system
G96.9 Disorder of central nervous system, unspecified
G97
Postprocedural disorders of nervous system, not elsewhere classified
G97.1 Other reaction to spinal and lumbar puncture
     Use additional code to identify specific reaction.
    Excludes:
   CSF leak due to puncture (G96.0-)
G97.2 Intracranial hypotension following ventricular shunting
G97.8 Other postprocedural disorders of nervous system
     Includes:
    Pseudomeningocele
G97.9 Postprocedural disorder of nervous system, unspecified
G98
Other disorders of nervous system, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
G99*
Nervous system disorder NOS
Other disorders of nervous system in diseases classified elsewhere
G99.0* Autonomic neuropathy in endocrine and metabolic diseases
      Includes:
     Amyloid autonomic neuropathy (E85.-†)
      Diabetic autonomic neuropathy (E10-E14† with common fourth character .4)
G99.1* Other disorders of autonomic nervous system in other diseases classified elsewhere
G99.2* Myelopathy in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Anterior spinal and vertebral artery compression syndromes (M47.0†)
      Myelopathy in:
     •
      intervertebral disc disorders (M50.0†,M51.0†)
         •
          neoplastic disease (C00-D48†)
           •
            spondylosis (M47.-†)
G99.8* Other specified disorders of nervous system in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Uraemic paralysis (N18.5 †)
313
I
CHAPTER VII
Diseases of the eye and adnexa
(H00-H59)
Excludes:
certain:
•
conditions originating in the perinatal period (P00-P96)
•
infectious and parasitic diseases (A00-B99)
complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O00-O99)
congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (Q00-Q99)
endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (E00-E90)
injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98)
neoplasms (C00-D48)
symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified (R00-R99)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
H00-H06
H10-H13
H15-H22
H25-H28
H30-H36
H40-H42
H43-H45
H46-H48
H49-H52
H53-H54
H55-H59
Disorders of eyelid, lacrimal system and orbit
Disorders of conjunctiva
Disorders of sclera, cornea, iris and ciliary body
Disorders of lens
Disorders of choroid and retina
Glaucoma
Disorders of vitreous body and globe
Disorders of optic nerve and visual pathways
Disorders of ocular muscles, binocular movement, accommodation and refraction
Visual disturbances and blindness
Other disorders of eye and adnexa
Asterisk categories for this chapter are provided as follows:
H03*
H06*
H13*
H19*
H22*
H28*
H32*
H36*
H42*
H45*
H48*
H58*
Disorders of eyelid in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of lacrimal system and orbit in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of conjunctiva in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of sclera and cornea in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of iris and ciliary body in diseases classified elsewhere
Cataract and other disorders of lens in diseases classified elsewhere
Chorioretinal disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Retinal disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Glaucoma in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of vitreous body and globe in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of optic [2nd] nerve and visual pathways in diseases classified elsewhere
Other disorders of eye and adnexa in diseases classified elsewhere
315
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H00
Disorders of eyelid, lacrimal system and orbit
(H00-H06)
H00
Hordeolum and chalazion
H00.0 Hordeolum and other deep inflammation of eyelid
     Includes:
    Abscess
   Furuncle
  of eyelid
 Stye
H00.1 Chalazion
H01
Other inflammation of eyelid
H01.0 Blepharitis
     Excludes:
    blepharoconjunctivitis (H10.5)
H01.1 Noninfectious dermatoses of eyelid
     Includes:
    Dermatitis
   •
    allergic
   •
    contact
   •
    eczematous
   Discoid lupus
  erythematosus
 Xeroderma
H01.8 Other specified inflammation of eyelid
H01.9 
of eyelid
Inflammation of eyelid, unspecified
H02
Other disorders of eyelid
Excludes:
congenital malformations of eyelid (Q10.0-Q10.3)
H02.0 Entropion and trichiasis of eyelid
H02.1 Ectropion of eyelid
H02.2 Lagophthalmos
H02.3 Blepharochalasis
     Includes:
    Dermatochalasis
H02.4 Ptosis of eyelid
H02.5 Other disorders affecting eyelid function
     Includes:
    Ankyloblepharon
   Blepharophimosis
  Lid retraction
 Excludes:
blepharospasm (G24.5)
organic (G25.6)
tic (psychogenic) (F95.-)
H02.6 Xanthelasma of eyelid
H02.7 Other degenerative disorders of eyelid and periocular area
     Includes:
    Chloasma
   Madarosis
  of eyelid
 Vitiligo
H02.8 Other specified disorders of eyelid
     Includes:
    Hypertrichosis of eyelid
   Retained foreign body in eyelid
316
DISEASES OF THE EYE AND ADNEXA (H00-H59)
H02.9
H03*
Disorder of eyelid, unspecified
Disorders of eyelid in diseases classified elsewhere
H03.0* Parasitic infestation of eyelid in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Dermatitis of eyelid due to Demodex species (B88.0†)
      Parasitic infestation of eyelid in:
     •
      leishmaniasis (B55.1†)
       •
        loiasis (B74.3†)
         •
          onchocerciasis (B73†)
           •
            phthiriasis (B85.3†)
H03.1* Involvement of eyelid in other infectious diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Involvement of eyelid in:
    •
     herpesviral [herpes simplex] infection (B00.5†)
      •
       leprosy (A30.-†)
        •
         molluscum contagiosum (B08.1†)
          •
           tuberculosis (A18.4†)
            •
             yaws (A66.-†)
              •
               zoster (B02.3†)
H03.8* 
H04.4
Involvement of eyelid in other diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Involvement of eyelid in impetigo (L01.0†)
H04
Disorders of lacrimal system
Excludes:
H04.0
congenital malformations of lacrimal system (Q10.4-Q10.6)
Dacryoadenitis
Includes:
Acute
Chronic
enlargement of lacrimal gland
H04.1 Other disorders of lacrimal gland
     Includes:
    Dacryops
   Dry eye syndrome
  Lacrimal:
 •
  cyst
 •
  gland atrophy
H04.2 Epiphora
H04.3 Acute and unspecified inflammation of lacrimal passages
     Includes:
    Dacryocystitis
   (phlegmonous)
  acute, subacute or unspecified
 Dacryopericystitis
Lacrimal caniculitis
Excludes:
neonatal dacryocystitis (P39.1)
H04.4 Chronic inflammation of lacrimal passages
     Includes:
    Dacryocystitis chronic
   Lacrimal:
  •
   canaliculitis chronic
  •
   mucocele chronic
317
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H04.5 Stenosis and insufficiency of lacrimal passages
     Includes:
    Blockage of:
   •
    lacrimal passages
   •
    tear duct
   Dacryolith
  Eversion of lacrimal punctum
 Stenosis of lacrimal:
•
 canaliculi
•
 duct
•
 sac
H04.6 Other changes in lacrimal passages
     Includes:
    Lacrimal fistula
H04.8 Other disorders of lacrimal system
H04.9 Disorder of lacrimal system, unspecified
H04.5
H05
Disorders of orbit
Excludes:
H05.0
congenital malformation of orbit (Q10.7)
Acute inflammation of orbit
Includes:
Abscess
Cellulitis
Osteomyelitis
Periostitis
of orbit
Tenonitis
H05.1 Chronic inflammatory disorders of orbit
     Includes:
    Granuloma of orbit
   Orbital inflammatory syndrome
H05.2 Exophthalmic conditions
     Includes:
    Displacement of globe (lateral) NOS
   Haemorrhage
  of orbit
 Oedema
H05.3 Deformity of orbit
     Includes:
    Atrophy
   Exostosis
of orbit
H05.4 Enophthalmos
H05.5 Retained (old) foreign body following penetrating wound of orbit
     Includes:
    Retrobulbar foreign body
H05.8 Other disorders of orbit
     Includes:
    Cyst of orbit
H05.9 Disorder of orbit, unspecified
H06*
Disorders of lacrimal system and orbit in diseases classified elsewhere
H06.0* Disorders of lacrimal system in diseases classified elsewhere
H06.1* Parasitic infestation of orbit in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Echinococcus infection of orbit (B67.-†)
      Myiasis of orbit (B87.2†)
H06.2* Dysthyroid exophthalmos (E05.-†)
H06.3* Other disorders of orbit in diseases classified elsewhere
318
DISEASES OF THE EYE AND ADNEXA (H00-H59)
Disorders of conjunctiva
(H10-H13)
H10
H11.9
Conjunctivitis
Excludes:
keratoconjunctivitis (H16.2)
H10.0 Mucopurulent conjunctivitis
H10.1 Acute atopic conjunctivitis
H10.2 Other acute conjunctivitis
H10.3 Acute conjunctivitis, unspecified
     Excludes:
    ophthalmia neonatorum NOS (P39.1)
H10.4 Chronic conjunctivitis
H10.5 Blepharoconjunctivitis
H10.8 Other conjunctivitis
H10.9 Conjunctivitis, unspecified
H11
Other disorders of conjunctiva
Excludes: 
H11.0
keratoconjunctivitis (H16.2)
Pterygium pseudopterygium (H11.8)
Excludes: 
H11.1 Conjunctival degenerations and deposits
     Includes:
    Conjunctival:
   •
    argyrosis [argyria]
   •
    concretions
   •
    pigmentation
   •
    xerosis NOS
H11.2 Conjunctival scars
     Includes:
    Symblepharon
H11.3 Conjunctival haemorrhage
     Includes:
    Subconjunctival haemorrhage
H11.4 Other conjunctival vascular disorders and cysts
     Includes:
    Conjunctival:
   •
    aneurysm
   •
    hyperaemia
   •
    oedema
H11.8 Other specified disorders of conjunctiva
     Includes:
    Pseudopterygium
H11.9 Disorder of conjunctiva, unspecified
319
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H13*
H13*
Disorders of conjunctiva in diseases classified elsewhere
H13.0* Filarial infection of conjunctiva (B74.-†)
H13.1* Conjunctivitis in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Conjunctivitis (due to):
    •
     Acanthamoeba (B60.1†)
      •
       adenoviral follicular (acute) (B30.1†)
        •
         chlamydial (A74.0†)
          •
           diphtheritic (A36.8†)
            •
             gonococcal (A54.3†)
              •
               haemorrhagic (acute)(epidemic) (B30.3†)
                •
                 herpesviral [herpes simplex] (B00.5†)
                  •
                   meningococcal (A39.8†)
                    •
                     Newcastle (B30.8†)
                      •
                       zoster (B02.3†)
H13.2* Conjunctivitis in other diseases classified elsewhere
H13.3* Ocular pemphigoid (L12.-†)
        Includes:
       Ocularcicatricial pemphigoid (L12.1†)
H13.8* Other disorders of conjunctiva in diseases classified elsewhere
320
DISEASES OF THE EYE AND ADNEXA (H00-H59)
Disorders of sclera, cornea, iris and ciliary body
(H15-H22)
H15
H16.9
Disorders of sclera
H15.0 Scleritis
H15.1 Episcleritis
H15.8 Other disorders of sclera
     Includes:
    Equatorial staphyloma
   Scleral ectasia
  Excludes:
 degenerative myopia (H44.2)
H15.9 Disorder of sclera, unspecified
H16
Keratitis
H16.0 Corneal ulcer
     Includes:
    Ulcer:
   •
    corneal:
   •
    NOS
   •
    central
   •
    marginal
   •
    perforated
   •
    ring
   •
    with hypopyon
   •
    Mooren
H16.1 Other superficial keratitis without conjunctivitis
     Includes:
    Keratitis:
   •
    areolar
   •
    filamentary
   •
    nummular
   •
    stellate
   •
    striate
   •
    superficial punctate
   Photokeratitis
  Snow blindness
H16.2 Keratoconjunctivitis
     Includes:
    Keratoconjunctivitis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    exposure
   •
    neurotrophic
   •
    phlyctenular
   Ophthalmia nodosa
  Superficial keratitis with conjunctivitis
H16.3 Interstitial and deep keratitis
H16.4 Corneal neovascularization
     Includes:
    Ghost vessels (corneal)
   Pannus (corneal)
H16.8 Other keratitis
H16.9 Keratitis, unspecified
321
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H17
H17
Corneal scars and opacities
H17.0 Adherent leukoma
H17.1 Other central corneal opacity
H17.8 Other corneal scars and opacities
H17.9 Corneal scar and opacity, unspecified
H18
Other disorders of cornea
H18.0 Corneal pigmentations and deposits
     Includes:
    Haematocornea
   Kayser-Fleischer ring
  Krukenberg's spindle
 Staehli's line
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
H18.1 Bullous keratopathy
H18.2 Other corneal oedema
H18.3 Changes in corneal membranes
     Includes:
    Fold
   Rupture
in Descemet's membrane
H18.4 Corneal degeneration
     Includes:
    Arcus senilis
   Band keratopathy
  Excludes:
 Mooren's ulcer (H16.0)
H18.5 Hereditary corneal dystrophies
     Includes:
    Dystrophy:
   •
    corneal:
   •
    epithelial
   •
    granular
   •
    lattice
   •
    macular
   •
    Fuchs
H18.6 Keratoconus
H18.7 Other corneal deformities
     Includes:
    Corneal:
   •
    ectasia
   •
    staphyloma
   Descemetocele
  Excludes:
 congenital malformations of cornea (Q13.3-Q13.4)
H18.8 Other specified disorders of cornea
     Includes:
    Anaesthesia
   Hypaesthesia
  Recurrent erosion
H18.9
H19*
H19.0*
322
of cornea
Disorder of cornea, unspecified
Disorders of sclera and cornea in diseases classified elsewhere
Scleritis and episcleritis in diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Syphilitic episcleritis (A52.7†)
Tuberculous episcleritis (A18.5†)
Zoster scleritis (B02.3†)
DISEASES OF THE EYE AND ADNEXA (H00-H59)
H19.1* Herpesviral keratitis and keratoconjunctivitis (B00.5†)
        Includes:
       Dendritic and disciform keratitis
H19.2* Keratitis and keratoconjunctivitis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified
      elsewhere
     Includes:
    Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (B30.0†)
     Keratitis and keratoconjunctivitis (interstitial) in:
    •
     acanthamoebiasis (B60.1†)
      •
       measles (B05.8†)
        •
         syphilis (A50.3†)
          •
           tuberculosis (A18.5†)
            •
             zoster (B02.3†)
H19.3* Keratitis and keratoconjunctivitis in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (M35.0†)
H19.8* Other disorders of sclera and cornea in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Keratoconus in Down's syndrome (Q90.-†)
H20
H20.0
H21.3
Iridocyclitis
Acute and subacute iridocyclitis
Includes:
Anterior uveitis
Cyclitis
Iritis
H20.1 Chronic iridocyclitis
H20.2 Lens-induced iridocyclitis
H20.8 Other iridocyclitis
H20.9 
acute, recurrent or subacute
Iridocyclitis, unspecified
H21
Other disorders of iris and ciliary body
Excludes:
sympathetic uveitis (H44.1)
H21.0 Hyphaema
     Includes:
    Spontaneous hyphaema
   Excludes:
  traumatic hyphaema (S05.1)
H21.1 Other vascular disorders of iris and ciliary body
     Includes:
    Neovascularization of iris or ciliary body
   Rubeosis of iris
H21.2 Degeneration of iris and ciliary body
     Includes:
    Degeneration of:
   •
    iris (pigmentary)
   •
    pupillary margin
   Iridoschisis
  Iris atrophy (essential)(progressive)
 Miotic pupillary cyst
Translucency of iris
H21.3 Cyst of iris, ciliary body and anterior chamber
     Includes:
    Cyst of iris, ciliary body or anterior chamber:
   •
    NOS
   •
    exudative
   •
    implantation
   •
    parasitic
   Excludes:
  miotic pupillary cyst (H21.2)
323
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H21.4 Pupillary membranes
     Includes:
    Iris bombé
    Pupillary:
   •
    occlusion
   •
    seclusion
H21.5 Other adhesions and disruptions of iris and ciliary body
     Includes:
    Goniosynechiae
   Iridodialysis
  Recession, chamber angle
 Synechiae (iris):
•
 NOS
•
 anterior
•
 posterior
Excludes:
corectopia (Q13.2)
H21.8 Other specified disorders of iris and ciliary body
H21.9 Disorder of iris and ciliary body, unspecified
H21.4
H22*
Disorders of iris and ciliary body in diseases classified elsewhere
H22.0* Iridocyclitis in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Iridocyclitis in:
    •
     gonococcal infection (A54.3†)
      •
       herpesviral [herpes simplex] infection (B00.5†)
        •
         syphilis (secondary) (A51.4†)
          •
           tuberculosis (A18.5†)
            •
             zoster (B02.3†)
H22.1* Iridocyclitis in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Iridocyclitis in:
    •
     ankylosing spondylitis (M45†)
      •
       sarcoidosis (D86.8†)
H22.8* Other disorders of iris and ciliary body in diseases classified elsewhere
324
DISEASES OF THE EYE AND ADNEXA (H00-H59)
Disorders of lens
(H25-H28)
H25
H27.9
Senile cataract
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .38 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Excludes:
capsular glaucoma with pseudoexfoliation of lens (H40.1)
H25.0 Senile incipient cataract
     Includes:
    Senile cataract:
   •
    coronary
   •
    cortical
   •
    punctate
   Subcapsular polar senile cataract (anterior)(posterior)
  Water clefts
H25.1 Senile nuclear cataract
     Includes:
    Cataracta brunescens
   Nuclear sclerosis cataract
H25.2 Senile cataract, morgagnian type
     Includes:
    Senile hypermature cataract
H25.8 Other senile cataract
     Includes:
    Combined forms of senile cataract
H25.9 Senile cataract, unspecified
H26
Other cataract
Excludes:
congenital cataract (Q12.0)
H26.0 Infantile, juvenile and presenile cataract
H26.1 Traumatic cataract
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
H26.2 Complicated cataract
     Includes:
    Cataract:
   •
    in chronic iridocyclitis
   •
    secondary to ocular disorders
   Glaucomatous flecks (subcapsular)
H26.3 Drug-induced cataract
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
H26.4 After-cataract
     Includes:
    Posterior capsular opacification
   Secondary cataract
  Soemmerring's ring
H26.8 Other specified cataract
H26.9 Cataract, unspecified
H27
Other disorders of lens
Excludes:
congenital lens malformations (Q12.-)
mechanical complications of intraocular lens (T85.2)
pseudophakia (Z96.1)
H27.0 Aphakia
H27.1 Dislocation of lens
H27.8 Other specified disorders of lens
H27.9 Disorder of lens, unspecified
325
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H28*
H28*
Cataract and other disorders of lens in diseases classified elsewhere
H28.0* Diabetic cataract (E10-E14† with common fourth character .3)
H28.1* Cataract in other endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases
      Includes:
     Cataract in hypoparathyroidism (E20.-†)
      Malnutrition-dehydration cataract (E40-E46†)
H28.2* Cataract in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Myotonic cataract (G71.1†)
H28.8* Other disorders of lens in diseases classified elsewhere
326
DISEASES OF THE EYE AND ADNEXA (H00-H59)
Disorders of choroid and retina
(H30-H36)
H30 Chorioretinal inflammation
H30.0 Focal chorioretinal inflammation
     Includes:
    Focal:
   •
    chorioretinitis
   •
    choroiditis
   •
    retinitis
   •
    retinochoroiditis
H30.1 Disseminated chorioretinal inflammation
     Includes:
    Disseminated:
   •
    chorioretinitis
   •
    choroiditis
   •
    retinitis
   •
    retinochoroiditis
   Excludes:
  exudative retinopathy (H35.0)
H30.2 Posterior cyclitis
     Includes:
    Pars planitis
H30.8 Other chorioretinal inflammations
     Includes:
    Harada's disease
H30.9 
H31.9
Chorioretinal inflammation, unspecified
Includes:
Chorioretinitis NOS
Choroiditis NOS
Retinitis NOS
Retinochoroiditis NOS
H31
Other disorders of choroid
H31.0 Chorioretinal scars
     Includes:
    Macula scars of posterior pole (postinflammatory)(post-traumatic)
   Solar retinopathy
H31.1 Choroidal degeneration
     Includes:
    Atrophy
   Sclerosis
Excludes:
of choroid
angioid streaks (H35.3)
H31.2 Hereditary choroidal dystrophy
     Includes:
    Choroideremia
   Dystrophy, choroidal (central areolar)(generalized)(peripapillary)
  Gyrate atrophy, choroid
 Excludes:
ornithinaemia (E72.4)
H31.3 Choroidal haemorrhage and rupture
     Includes:
    Choroidal haemorrhage:
   •
    NOS
   •
    expulsive
H31.4 Choroidal detachment
H31.8 Other specified disorders of choroid
H31.9 Disorder of choroid, unspecified
327
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H32*
H32*
Chorioretinal disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
H32.0* Chorioretinal inflammation in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Chorioretinitis:
    •
     syphilitic, late (A52.7†)
      •
       toxoplasma (B58.0†)
        •
         tuberculous (A18.5†)
H32.8* Other chorioretinal disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Albuminurica retinitis (N18.5†)
      Renal retinitis (N18.5†)
H33
Retinal detachments and breaks
Excludes:
detachment of retinal pigment epithelium (H35.7)
H33.0 Retinal detachment with retinal break
     Includes:
    Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment
H33.1 Retinoschisis and retinal cysts
     Includes:
    Cyst of ora serrata
   Parasitic cyst of retina NOS
  Pseudocyst of retina
 Excludes:
congenital retinoschisis (Q14.1)
microcystoid degeneration of retina (H35.4)
H33.2 Serous retinal detachment
     Includes:
    Retinal detachment:
   •
    NOS
   •
    without retinal break
   Excludes:
  central serous chorioretinopathy (H35.7)
H33.3 Retinal breaks without detachment
     Includes:
    Horseshoe tear
   Round hole
Excludes:
of retina, without detachment
Operculum
Retinal break NOS
chorioretinal scars after surgery for detachment (H59.8-)
peripheral retinal degeneration without break (H35.4)
H33.4 Traction detachment of retina
     Includes:
    Proliferative vitreo-retinopathy with retinal detachment
   Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .33 to classify any associated diabetes
  mellitus.
H33.5 Other retinal detachments
H34
Retinal vascular occlusions
Excludes:
amaurosis fugax (G45.3)
H34.0 Transient retinal artery occlusion
H34.1 Central retinal artery occlusion
H34.2 Other retinal artery occlusions
     Includes:
    Hollenhorst's plaque
   Retinal:
  •
   artery occlusion:
  •
   branch
  •
   partial
  •
   microembolism
328
DISEASES OF THE EYE AND ADNEXA (H00-H59)
H34.8
H34.9
H35
Other retinal vascular occlusions
Includes:
Retinal vein occlusion:
•
central
•
incipient
•
partial
•
tributary
H35.5
Retinal vascular occlusion, unspecified
Other retinal disorders
H35.0 Background retinopathy and retinal vascular changes
     Includes:
    Changes in retinal vascular appearance
   Retinal:
  •
   micro-aneurysms
  •
   neovascularization
  •
   perivasculitis
  •
   varices
  •
   vascular sheathing
  •
   vasculitis
  Retinopathy:
 •
  NOS
 •
  background NOS
 •
  Coats
 •
  exudative
 •
  hypertensive
H35.1 Retinopathy of prematurity
     Includes:
    Retrolental fibroplasia
H35.2 Other proliferative retinopathy
     Includes:
    Proliferative vitreo-retinopathy
   Excludes:
  proliferative vitreo-retinopathy with retinal detachment (H33.4)
H35.3 Degeneration of macula and posterior pole
     Includes:
    Angioid streaks
   Cyst
  Drusen (degenerative)
 of macula
Hole
Puckering
Kuhnt-Junius degeneration
Senile macular degeneration (atrophic)(exudative)
Toxic maculopathy
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
H35.4 Peripheral retinal degeneration
     Includes:
    Degeneration, retina:
   •
    NOS
   •
    lattice
   •
    microcystoid
   •
    palisade
   •
    paving stone
   •
    reticular
   Excludes:
  with retinal break (H33.3)
H35.5 Hereditary retinal dystrophy
     Includes:
    Dystrophy:
   •
    retinal (albipunctate)(pigmentary)(vitelliform)
   •
    tapetoretinal
   •
    vitreoretinal
   Retinitis pigmentosa
  Stargardt's disease
329
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H35.6 
H35.6
Retinal haemorrhage
H35.7 Separation of retinal layers
     Includes:
    Central serous chorioretinopathy
   Detachment of retinal pigment epithelium
H35.8 Other specified retinal disorders
     Includes:
    Drug induced cystoid macular oedema
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug
  Excludes:
 cystoid macular oedema following cataract surgery (H59.81)
H35.9 Retinal disorder, unspecified
H36*
Retinal disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
H36.0* Diabetic retinopathy (E10-E14† with common fourth character .3)
H36.8* Other retinal disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Atherosclerotic retinopathy (I70.8†)
      Proliferative sickle-cell retinopathy (D57.-†)
       Retinal dystrophy in lipid storage disorders (E75.-†)
330
DISEASES OF THE EYE AND ADNEXA (H00-H59)
Glaucoma
(H40-H42)
H40
H42.8*
Glaucoma
Excludes:
absolute glaucoma (H44.5)
congenital glaucoma (Q15.0)
traumatic glaucoma due to birth injury (P15.3)
H40.0 Glaucoma suspect
     Includes:
    Ocular hypertension
H40.1 Primary open-angle glaucoma
     Includes:
    Glaucoma (primary)(residual stage):
   •
    capsular with pseudoexfoliation of lens
   •
    chronic simple
   •
    low-tension
   •
    pigmentary
H40.2 Primary angle-closure glaucoma
     Includes:
    Angle-closure glaucoma (primary)(residual stage):
   •
    acute
   •
    chronic
   •
    intermittent
H40.3 Glaucoma secondary to eye trauma
     Use additional code to identify cause.
H40.4 Glaucoma secondary to eye inflammation
     Use additional code to identify cause.
H40.5 Glaucoma secondary to other eye disorders
     Use additional code to identify cause.
H40.6 Glaucoma secondary to drugs
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
H40.8 Other glaucoma
H40.9 Glaucoma, unspecified
H42*
Glaucoma in diseases classified elsewhere
H42.0* Glaucoma in endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases
      Includes:
     Glaucoma in:
    •
     amyloidosis (E85.-†)
      •
       Lowe's syndrome (E72.0†)
H42.8* Glaucoma in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Glaucoma in onchocerciasis (B73†)
331
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H43
Disorders of vitreous body and globe
(H43-H45)
H43
Disorders of vitreous body
H43.0 Vitreous prolapse
     Excludes:
    vitreous syndrome following cataract surgery (H59.0)
H43.1 Vitreous haemorrhage
     Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .33 to classify any associated diabetes
    mellitus.
H43.2 Crystalline deposits in vitreous body
H43.3 Other vitreous opacities
     Includes:
    Vitreous membranes and strands
H43.8 Other disorders of vitreous body
     Includes:
    Vitreous:
   •
    degeneration
   •
    detachment
   Excludes:
  proliferative vitreo-retinopathy with retinal detachment (H33.4)
H43.9 Disorder of vitreous body, unspecified
H44
Disorders of globe
Includes:
disorders affecting multiple structures of eye
H44.0 Purulent endophthalmitis
     Includes:
    Acute endophthalmitis
   Infective endophthalmitis
  Metastatic endophthalmitis
 Panophthalmitis
Subacute endophthalmitis
Vitreous abscess
H44.1 Other endophthalmitis
     Includes:
    Parasitic endophthalmitis NOS
   Sympathetic uveitis
H44.2 Degenerative myopia
H44.3 Other degenerative disorders of globe
     Includes:
    Chalcosis
   Siderosis of eye
H44.4 Hypotony of eye
H44.5 Degenerated conditions of globe
     Includes:
    Absolute glaucoma
   Atrophy of globe
  Phthisis bulbi
H44.6 Retained (old) intraocular foreign body, magnetic
     Includes:
    Retained (old) magnetic foreign body (in):
   •
    anterior chamber
   •
    ciliary body
   •
    iris
   •
    lens
   •
    posterior wall of globe
   •
    vitreous body
332
DISEASES OF THE EYE AND ADNEXA (H00-H59)
H44.7
Retained (old) intraocular foreign body, nonmagnetic
Includes:
Retained (nonmagnetic)(old) foreign body (in):
•
anterior chamber
•
ciliary body
•
iris
•
lens
•
posterior wall of globe
•
vitreous body
H44.8 Other disorders of globe
     Includes:
    Haemophthalmos
   Luxation of globe
H44.9 
H47.5
Disorder of globe, unspecified
H45*
Disorders of vitreous body and globe in diseases classified elsewhere
H45.0* Vitreous haemorrhage in diseases classified elsewhere
H45.1* Endophthalmitis in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Endophthalmitis in:
    •
     cysticercosis (B69.1†)
      •
       onchocerciasis (B73†)
        •
         toxocariasis (B83.0†)
H45.8* Other disorders of vitreous body and globe in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of optic nerve and visual pathways
(H46-H48)
H46
Optic neuritis
Includes:
Excludes:
H47
Optic:
•
neuropathy, except ischaemic
•
papillitis
Retrobulbar neuritis NOS
ischaemic optic neuropathy (H47.0)
neuromyelitis optica [Devic] (G36.0)
Other disorders of optic [2nd] nerve and visual pathways
H47.0 Disorders of optic nerve, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Compression of optic nerve
   Haemorrhage in optic nerve sheath
  Ischaemic optic neuropathy
H47.1 Papilloedema, unspecified
H47.2 Optic atrophy
     Includes:
    Temporal pallor of optic disc
H47.20o Hereditary optic atrophy
       Includes:
      Leber's optic atrophy
H47.28o Other optic atrophy
       Includes:
      Optic atrophy NOS
H47.3 Other disorders of optic disc
     Includes:
    Drusen of optic disc
   Pseudopapilloedema
H47.4 Disorders of optic chiasm
H47.5 Disorders of other visual pathways
     Includes:
    Disorders of optic tracts, geniculate nuclei and optic radiations
333
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H47.6 
H47.6
Disorders of visual cortex
H47.7 Disorder of visual pathways, unspecified
H48*
Disorders of optic [2nd] nerve and visual pathways in diseases classified
elsewhere
H48.0* Optic atrophy in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Optic atrophy in late syphilis (A52.1†)
H48.1* Retrobulbar neuritis in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Retrobulbar neuritis in:
    •
     late syphilis (A52.1†)
      •
       meningococcal infection (A39.8†)
        •
         multiple sclerosis (G35†)
H48.8* Other disorders of optic nerve and visual pathways in diseases classified elsewhere
334
DISEASES OF THE EYE AND ADNEXA (H00-H59)
Disorders of ocular muscles, binocular movement,
accommodation and refraction
(H49-H52)
Excludes:
H49
H50.9
nystagmus and other irregular eye movements (H55)
Paralytic strabismus
Excludes:
ophthalmoplegia:
•
internal (H52.5)
•
internuclear (H51.2)
•
progressive supranuclear (G23.1)
H49.0 Third [oculomotor] nerve palsy
H49.1 Fourth [trochlear] nerve palsy
H49.2 Sixth [abducent] nerve palsy
H49.3 Total (external) ophthalmoplegia
H49.4 Progressive external ophthalmoplegia
H49.8 Other paralytic strabismus
     Includes:
    External ophthalmoplegia NOS
   Kearns-Sayre syndrome
H49.9 Paralytic strabismus, unspecified
H50
Other strabismus
H50.0 Convergent concomitant strabismus
     Includes:
    Esotropia (alternating)(monocular), except intermittent
H50.1 Divergent concomitant strabismus
     Includes:
    Exotropia (alternating)(monocular), except intermittent
H50.2 Vertical strabismus
     Includes:
    Hypertopia
   Hypotropia
H50.3 Intermittent heterotropia
     Includes:
    Intermittent:
   •
    esotropia (alternating)(monocular)
   •
    exotropia (alternating)(monocular)
H50.4 Other and unspecified heterotropia
     Includes:
    Concomitant strabismus NOS
   Cyclotropia
  Microtropia
 Monofixation syndrome
H50.5 Heterophoria
     Includes:
    Alternating hyperphoria
   Esophoria
  Exophoria
H50.6 Mechanical strabismus
     Includes:
    Brown's sheath syndrome
   Strabismus due to adhesions
  Traumatic limitation of duction of eye muscle
H50.8 Other specified strabismus
     Includes:
    Duane's syndrome
H50.9 Strabismus, unspecified
335
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H51
H51
Other disorders of binocular movement
H51.0 Palsy of conjugate gaze
H51.1 Convergence insufficiency and excess
H51.2 Internuclear ophthalmoplegia
H51.8 Other specified disorders of binocular movement
H51.9 Disorder of binocular movement, unspecified
H52
Disorders of refraction and accommodation
H52.0 Hypermetropia
H52.1 Myopia
     Excludes:
degenerative myopia (H44.2)
H52.2 Astigmatism
H52.3 Anisometropia and aniseikonia
H52.4 Presbyopia
H52.5 Disorders of accommodation
     Includes:
    Internal ophthalmoplegia (complete)(total)
   Paresis
  of accommodation
 Spasm
H52.6 Other disorders of refraction
H52.7 Disorder of refraction, unspecified
Visual disturbances and blindness
(H53-H54)
H53
Visual disturbances
H53.0 Amblyopia ex anopsia
     Includes:
    Amblyopia:
   •
    anisometropic
   •
    deprivation
   •
    strabismic
H53.1 Subjective visual disturbances
     Includes:
    Asthenopia
   Day blindness
  Hemeralopia
 Metamorphopsia
Photophobia
Scintillating scotoma
Sudden visual loss
Visual halos
Excludes:
visual hallucinations (R44.1)
H53.2 Diplopia
     Includes:
H53.3 Other disorders of binocular vision
     Includes:
    Abnormal retinal correspondence
   Fusion with defective stereopsis
  Simultaneous visual perception without fusion
 Suppression of binocular vision
336
Double vision
DISEASES OF THE EYE AND ADNEXA (H00-H59)
H53.4
Visual field defects
Includes:
Enlarged blind spot
Generalized contraction of visual field
Hemianop(s)ia (heteronymous)(homonymous)
Quadrant anop(s)ia
Scotoma:
•
arcuate
•
Bjerrum
•
central
•
ring
H53.5 Colour vision deficiencies
     Includes:
    Achromatopsia
   Acquired colour vision deficiency
  Colour blindness
 Deuteranomaly
Deuteranopia
Protanomaly
Protanopia
Tritanomaly
Tritanopia
Excludes:
day blindness (H53.1)
H53.6 Night blindness
     Excludes:
    due to vitamin A deficiency (E50.5)
H53.8 Other visual disturbances
H53.9 
H54.9
Visual disturbance, unspecified
H54
Visual impairment including blindness (binocular or monocular)
Note:
Excludes:
For definition of visual impairment categories see Table of Visual Impairment
amaurosis fugax (G45.3)
H54.0 Blindness, binocular
     Includes:
    Visual impairment category 5
H54.1 Severe visual impairment, binocular
     Includes:
    Visual impairment category 2
H54.2 Moderate visual impairment, binocular
     Includes:
    Visual impairment category 1
H54.3 Mild or no visual impairment, binocular
     Includes:
    Visual impairment category 0
H54.4 Blindness, monocular
     Includes:
    Visual impairment categories 3, 4, 5 in one eye and categories 0, 1, 2, or 9 in the other eye.
H54.5 Severe visual impairment, monocular
     Includes:
    Visual impairment category 2 in one eye and categories 0, 1 or 9 in other eye.
H54.6 Moderate visual impairment, monocular
     Includes:
    Visual impairment category 1 in one eye and categories 0 or 9 in other eye.
H54.9 Unspecified visual impairment (binocular)
     Includes:
    Visual impairment category 9
337
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Table of Visual Impairment
H54.9
Note:
This table gives a classification of severity of visual impairment recommended by the Resolution of the International
Council of Ophthalmology (2002) and the Recommendations of the WHO Consultation on "Development of
Standards for Characterization of Vision Loss and Visual Functioning" (Sept 2003).
For characterizing visual impairment for codes H54.0 to H54.3, visual acuity should be measured with both eyes
open with presenting correction if any. For characterizing visual impairment for codes H54.4 to H54.6, visual acuity
should be measured monocularly with presenting correction if any.
If the extent of the visual field is taken into account, patients with a visual field of the better eye no greater than 10°
in radius around central fixation should be placed under category 3 for monocular blindness (H54.4), this degree of
field loss would apply to the affected eye.
Presenting distance visual acuity
Category
Worse than:
Equal to or better than:
6/18
Mild or no visual
impairment
0
3/10 (0.3)
20/70
Moderate visual 6/18 6/60
impairment 
1 
3/10 (0.3) 1/10 (0.1)
20/70 20/200
Severe visual 6/60 3/60
impairment 
2 
1/10 (0.1) 1/20 (0.05)
20/200 20/400
3/60 1/60*
Blindness
3
1/20 (0.05) 1/50 (0.02)
20/400 5/300 (20/1200)
1/60*
Blindness
4
Light perception
1/50 (0.02)
5/300 (20/1200)
Blindness
5
9
Note:
338
No light perception
Undetermined or unspecified
counts fingers (CF) at 1 metre
* Or
The term visual impairment in category H54 comprises category 0 for mild or no visual impairment, category 1 for
moderate visual impairment, category 2 for severe visual impairment, categories 3, 4 and 5 for blindness and
category 9 for unqualified visual impairment. The term “low vision” included in the previous revision has been
replaced by categories 1 and 2 to avoid confusion with those requiring low vision care.
DISEASES OF THE EYE AND ADNEXA (H00-H59)
Other disorders of eye and adnexa
(H55-H59)
H55
Nystagmus and other irregular eye movements
Includes:
H57
H59.9
Nystagmus:
•
NOS
•
congenital
•
deprivation
•
dissociated
•
latent
Other disorders of eye and adnexa
H57.0 Anomalies of pupillary function
H57.1 Ocular pain
H57.8 Other specified disorders of eye and adnexa
H57.9 Disorder of eye and adnexa, unspecified
H58*
Other disorders of eye and adnexa in diseases classified elsewhere
H58.0* Anomalies of pupillary function in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Argyll Robertson phenomenon or pupil, syphilitic (A52.1†)
H58.1* Visual disturbances in diseases classified elsewhere
H58.8* Other specified disorders of eye and adnexa in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Syphilitic oculopathy NEC:
    •
     congenital:
    •
     early (A50.0†)
      •
       late (A50.3†)
        •
         early (secondary) (A51.4†)
          •
           late (A52.7†)
H59
Postprocedural disorders of eye and adnexa, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
mechanical complication of:
•
intraocular lens (T85.2)
•
other ocular prosthetic devices, implants and grafts (T85.3)
pseudophakia (Z96.1)
H59.0 Keratopathy (bullous aphakic) following cataract surgery
     Includes:
    Vitreal corneal syndrome
   Vitreous (Touch) syndrome
H59.8 Other postprocedural disorders of eye and adnexa
H59.80o Cataract (lens) fragments in eye following cataract surgery
H59.81o Cystoid Macular oedema following cataract surgery
H59.88o Other postprocedural disorders of eye and adnexa
       Includes:
      Bleb associated endophthalmitis
     Chorioretinal scars after surgery for detachment
    Inflammation (infection) of postprocedural bleb
   Postprocedural blebitis
H59.9 Postprocedural disorder of eye and adnexa, unspecified
339
I
CHAPTER VIII
Diseases of the ear and mastoid process
(H60-H95)
Excludes:
certain:
•
conditions originating in the perinatal period (P00-P96)
•
infectious and parasitic diseases (A00-B99)
complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O00-O99)
congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (Q00-Q99)
endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (E00-E90)
injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98)
neoplasms (C00-D48)
symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified (R00-R99)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
H60-H62
H65-H75
H80-H83
H90-H95
Diseases of external ear
Diseases of middle ear and mastoid
Diseases of inner ear
Other disorders of ear
Asterisk categories for this chapter are provided as follows:
H62*
H67*
H75*
H82*
H94*
Disorders of external ear in diseases classified elsewhere
Otitis media in diseases classified elsewhere
Other disorders of middle ear and mastoid in diseases classified elsewhere
Vertiginous syndromes in diseases classified elsewhere
Other disorders of ear in diseases classified elsewhere
341
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H60
Diseases of external ear
(H60-H62)
H60
H60.0
Otitis externa
Abscess of external ear
Includes:
Boil
Carbuncle
Furuncle
of auricle or external auditory canal
H60.1 Cellulitis of external ear
     Includes:
    Cellulitis of:
   •
    auricle
   •
    external auditory canal
H60.2 Malignant otitis externa
H60.3 Other infective otitis externa
     Includes:
    Otitis externa:
   •
    diffuse
   •
    haemorrhagic
   Swimmer's ear
H60.4 Cholesteatoma of external ear
     Includes:
    Keratosis obturans of external ear (canal)
H60.5 Acute otitis externa, noninfective
     Includes:
    Acute otitis externa:
   •
    NOS
   •
    actinic
   •
    chemical
   •
    contact
   •
    eczematoid
   •
    reactive
H60.8 Other otitis externa
     Includes:
    Chronic otitis externa NOS
H60.9 Otitis externa, unspecified
H61
Other disorders of external ear
H61.0 Perichondritis of external ear
     Includes:
    Chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis
   Perichondritis of:
  •
   auricle
  •
   pinna
H61.1 Noninfective disorders of pinna
     Includes:
    Acquired deformity of:
   •
    auricle
   •
    pinna
   Excludes:
  cauliflower ear (M95.1)
H61.2 Impacted cerumen
     Includes:
    Wax in ear
H61.3 Acquired stenosis of external ear canal
     Includes:
    Collapse of external ear canal
H61.8 Other specified disorders of external ear
     Includes:
    Exostosis of external canal
H61.9 Disorder of external ear, unspecified
342
DISEASES OF THE EAR AND MASTOID PROCESS (H60-H95)
H62*
Disorders of external ear in diseases classified elsewhere
H62.0* H62.1* Otitis externa in viral diseases classified elsewhere
             Includes:
            Otitis externa in:
           •
            herpesviral [herpes simplex] infection (B00.1†)
             •
              zoster (B02.8†)
H62.2* Otitis externa in mycoses
      Includes:
     Otitis externa in:
    •
     aspergillosis (B44.8†)
      •
       candidiasis (B37.83†)
        Otomycosis NOS (B36.9†)
H62.3* Otitis externa in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
H62.4* Otitis externa in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Otitis externa in impetigo (L01.-†)
H62.8* 
H62.8*
Otitis externa in bacterial diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Otitis externa in erysipelas (A46†)
Other disorders of external ear in diseases classified elsewhere
343
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H65
Diseases of middle ear and mastoid
(H65-H75)
H65
Nonsuppurative otitis media
Note:
Includes:
Use additional code to identify presence of perforated tympanic membrane(H72.-)
with myringitis
H65.0 Acute serous otitis media
     Includes:
    Acute and subacute secretory otitis media
H65.1 Other acute nonsuppurative otitis media
     Includes:
    Otitis media, acute and subacute:
   •
    allergic (mucoid)(sanguinous)(serous)
   •
    mucoid
   •
    nonsuppurative NOS
   •
    sanguinous
   •
    seromucinous
   Excludes:
  otitic barotrauma (T70.0)
 otitis media (acute) NOS (H66.9)
H65.2 Chronic serous otitis media
     Includes:
    Chronic tubotympanal catarrh
H65.3 Chronic mucoid otitis media
     Includes:
    Glue ear
   Otitis media, chronic:
  •
   mucinous
  •
   secretory
  •
   transudative
  Excludes:
 adhesive middle ear disease (H74.1)
H65.4 Other chronic nonsuppurative otitis media
     Includes:
    Otitis media, chronic:
   •
    allergic
   •
    exudative
   •
    nonsuppurative NOS
   •
    seromucinous
   •
    with effusion (nonpurulent)
H65.9 Nonsuppurative otitis media, unspecified
     Includes:
    Otitis media:
   •
    allergic
   •
    catarrhal
   •
    exudative
   •
    mucoid
   •
    secretory
   •
    seromucinous
   •
    serous
   •
    transudative
   •
    with effusion (nonpurulent)
H66
Suppurative and unspecified otitis media
Note:
Includes:
Use additional code to identify presence of perforated tympanic membrane(H72.-)
with myringitis
H66.0 Acute suppurative otitis media
H66.1 Chronic tubotympanic suppurative otitis media
     Includes:
    Benign chronic suppurative otitis media
   Chronic tubotympanic disease
H66.2 Chronic atticoantral suppurative otitis media
     Includes:
    Chronic atticoantral disease
344
DISEASES OF THE EAR AND MASTOID PROCESS (H60-H95)
H66.3 Other chronic suppurative otitis media
     Includes:
    Chronic suppurative otitis media NOS
H66.4 Suppurative otitis media, unspecified
     Includes:
    Purulent otitis media NOS
H66.9 Otitis media, unspecified
     Includes:
    Otitis media:
   •
    NOS
   •
    acute NOS
   •
    chronic NOS
H67*
H70.9
Otitis media in diseases classified elsewhere
H67.0* Otitis media in bacterial diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Otitis media in:
    •
     scarlet fever (A38†)
      •
       tuberculosis (A18.6†)
H67.1* Otitis media in viral diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Otitis media in:
    •
     influenza (J09 - J11†)
      •
       measles (B05.3†)
H67.8* Otitis media in other diseases classified elsewhere
H68
Eustachian salpingitis and obstruction
H68.0 Eustachian salpingitis
H68.1 Obstruction of Eustachian tube
     Includes:
    Compression
   Stenosis
  Stricture
H69
of Eustachian tube
Other disorders of Eustachian tube
H69.0 Patulous Eustachian tube
H69.8 Other specified disorders of Eustachian tube
H69.9 Eustachian tube disorder, unspecified
H70
H70.0
H70.1
Mastoiditis and related conditions
Acute mastoiditis
Includes:
Abscess
Empyema
Chronic mastoiditis
Includes:
Caries
Fistula
of mastoid
of mastoid
H70.2 Petrositis
     Includes:
H70.8 Other mastoiditis and related conditions
H70.9 Mastoiditis, unspecified
Inflammation of petrous bone (acute)(chronic)
345
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H71
Cholesteatoma of middle ear
Includes:
Excludes:
H71
H72
Cholesteatoma tympani
cholesteatoma of external ear (H60.4)
recurrent cholesteatoma of postmastoidectomy cavity (H95.0)
Perforation of tympanic membrane
Includes:
Excludes:
perforation of ear drum:
•
persistent post-traumatic
•
postinflammatory
traumatic rupture of ear drum (S09.2)
H72.0 Central perforation of tympanic membrane
H72.1 Attic perforation of tympanic membrane
     Includes:
    Perforation of pars flaccida
H72.2 Other marginal perforations of tympanic membrane
H72.8 Other perforations of tympanic membrane
     Includes:
    Perforation(s):
   •
    multiple
   of tympanic membrane
  •
   total
H72.9 Perforation of tympanic membrane, unspecified
H73 Other disorders of tympanic membrane
H73.0 Acute myringitis
     Includes:
    Acute tympanitis
   Bullous myringitis
  Excludes:
 with otitis media (H65-H66)
H73.1 Chronic myringitis
     Includes:
    Chronic tympanitis
   Excludes:
  with otitis media (H65-H66)
H73.8 Other specified disorders of tympanic membrane
H73.9 Disorder of tympanic membrane, unspecified
H74
Other disorders of middle ear and mastoid
H74.0 Tympanosclerosis
H74.1 Adhesive middle ear disease
     Includes:
    Adhesive otitis
   Excludes:
  glue ear (H65.3)
H74.2 Discontinuity and dislocation of ear ossicles
H74.3 Other acquired abnormalities of ear ossicles
     Includes:
    Ankylosis
   of ear ossicles
  Partial loss
H74.4 Polyp of middle ear
H74.8 Other specified disorders of middle ear and mastoid
H74.9 Disorder of middle ear and mastoid, unspecified
346
DISEASES OF THE EAR AND MASTOID PROCESS (H60-H95)
H75*
Other disorders of middle ear and mastoid in diseases classified elsewhere
H75.0* H75.8* 
H75.8*
Mastoiditis in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Tuberculous mastoiditis (A18.0†)
Other specified disorders of middle ear and mastoid in diseases classified elsewhere
347
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H80
Diseases of inner ear
(H80-H83)
H80
Otosclerosis
Includes:
otospongiosis
H80.0 Otosclerosis involving oval window, nonobliterative
H80.1 Otosclerosis involving oval window, obliterative
H80.2 Cochlear otosclerosis
     Includes:
    Otosclerosis involving:
   •
    otic capsule
   •
    round window
H80.8 Other otosclerosis
H80.9 Otosclerosis, unspecified
H81
Disorders of vestibular function
Excludes:
vertigo:
•
NOS (R42)
•
epidemic (A88.1)
H81.0 Ménière's disease
       Includes:
      Labyrinthine hydrops
     Ménière's syndrome or vertigo
H81.1 Benign paroxysmal vertigo
H81.2 Vestibular neuronitis
H81.3 Other peripheral vertigo
     Includes:
    Lermoyez' syndrome
   Vertigo:
  •
   aural
  •
   otogenic
  •
   peripheral NOS
H81.4 Vertigo of central origin
     Includes:
    Central positional nystagmus
H81.8 Other disorders of vestibular function
H81.9 Disorder of vestibular function, unspecified
     Includes:
    Vertiginous syndrome NOS
H82* Vertiginous syndromes in diseases classified elsewhere
H83 Other diseases of inner ear
H83.0 Labyrinthitis
H83.1 Labyrinthine fistula
H83.2 Labyrinthine dysfunction
     Includes:
    Hypersensitivity
   Hypofunction
  Loss of function
H83.3 Noise effects on inner ear
     Includes:
    Acoustic trauma
   Noise-induced hearing loss
H83.8 Other specified diseases of inner ear
H83.9 Disease of inner ear, unspecified
348
of labyrinth
DISEASES OF THE EAR AND MASTOID PROCESS (H60-H95)
Other disorders of ear
(H90-H95)
H90
H91.9
Conductive and sensorineural hearing loss
Includes:
Excludes:
congenital deafness
deaf mutism NEC (H91.3)
deafness NOS (H91.9)
hearing loss:
•
NOS (H91.9)
•
noise-induced (H83.3)
•
ototoxic (H91.0)
•
sudden (idiopathic) (H91.2)
H90.0 Conductive hearing loss, bilateral
H90.1 Conductive hearing loss, unilateral with unrestricted hearing on the contralateral side
H90.2 Conductive hearing loss, unspecified
     Includes:
    Conductive deafness NOS
H90.3 Sensorineural hearing loss, bilateral
H90.4 Sensorineural hearing loss, unilateral with unrestricted hearing on the contralateral side
H90.5 Sensorineural hearing loss, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital deafness NOS
   Hearing loss:
  •
   central NOS
  •
   neural NOS
  •
   perceptive NOS
  •
   sensory NOS
  Sensorineural deafness NOS
H90.6 Mixed conductive and sensorineural hearing loss, bilateral
H90.7 Mixed conductive and sensorineural hearing loss, unilateral with unrestricted hearing on the
     contralateral side
H90.8 Mixed conductive and sensorineural hearing loss, unspecified
H91
Other hearing loss
Excludes:
abnormal auditory perception (H93.2)
hearing loss as classified in H90.-
impacted cerumen (H61.2)
noise-induced hearing loss (H83.3)
psychogenic deafness (F44.6)
transient ischaemic deafness (H93.0)
H91.0 Ototoxic hearing loss
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify toxic agent.
H91.1 Presbycusis
     Includes:
    Presbyacusia
H91.2 Sudden idiopathic hearing loss
     Includes:
    Sudden hearing loss NOS
H91.3 Deaf mutism, not elsewhere classified
H91.8 Other specified hearing loss
H91.9 Hearing loss, unspecified
     Includes:
    Deafness:
   •
    NOS
   •
    high frequency
   •
    low frequency
349
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
H92
H92
Otalgia and effusion of ear
H92.0 Otalgia
H92.1 Otorrhoea
     Excludes:
H92.2
H93
leakage of cerebrospinal fluid through ear (G96.01)
Otorrhagia
Excludes:
traumatic otorrhagia - code by type of injury.
Other disorders of ear, not elsewhere classified
H93.0 Degenerative and vascular disorders of ear
     Includes:
    Transient ischaemic deafness
   Excludes:
  presbycusis (H91.1)
H93.1 Tinnitus
H93.2 Other abnormal auditory perceptions
     Includes:
    Auditory recruitment
   Diplacusis
  Hyperacusis
 Temporary auditory threshold shift
Excludes:
auditory hallucinations (R44.0)
H93.3 Disorders of acoustic nerve
     Includes:
    Disorder of 8th cranial nerve
H93.8 Other specified disorders of ear
H93.9 Disorder of ear, unspecified
H94*
Other disorders of ear in diseases classified elsewhere
H94.0* Acoustic neuritis in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Acoustic neuritis in syphilis (A52.1†)
H94.8* Other specified disorders of ear in diseases classified elsewhere
H95
Postprocedural disorders of ear and mastoid process, not elsewhere
classified
H95.0 Recurrent cholesteatoma of postmastoidectomy cavity
H95.1 Other disorders following mastoidectomy
     Includes:
    Chronic inflammation
   Granulation
  of postmastoidectomy cavity
 Mucosal cyst
H95.8 Other postprocedural disorders of ear and mastoid process
H95.9 Postprocedural disorder of ear and mastoid process, unspecified
350
I
CHAPTER IX
Diseases of the circulatory system
(I00-I99)
Excludes:
certain:
•
conditions originating in the perinatal period (P00-P96)
•
infectious and parasitic diseases (A00-B99)
complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O00-O99)
congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (Q00-Q99)
endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (E00-E90)
injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98)
neoplasms (C00-D48)
symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified (R00-R99)
systemic connective tissue disorders (M30-M36)
transient cerebral ischaemic attacks and related syndromes (G45.-)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
I00-I02
I05-I09
I10-I15
I20-I25
I26-I28
I30-I52
I60-I69
I70-I79
I80-I89
I95-I99
Acute rheumatic fever
Chronic rheumatic heart diseases
Hypertensive diseases
Ischaemic heart diseases
Pulmonary heart disease and diseases of pulmonary circulation
Other forms of heart disease
Cerebrovascular diseases
Diseases of arteries, arterioles and capillaries
Diseases of veins, lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes, not elsewhere classified
Other and unspecified disorders of the circulatory system
Asterisk categories for this chapter are provided as follows:
I32*
I39*
I41*
I43*
I52*
I68*
I79*
I98*
Pericarditis in diseases classified elsewhere
Endocarditis and heart valve disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Myocarditis in diseases classified elsewhere
Cardiomyopathy in diseases classified elsewhere
Other heart disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Cerebrovascular disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of arteries, arterioles and capillaries in diseases classified elsewhere
Other disorders of circulatory system in diseases classified elsewhere
351
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I00
Acute rheumatic fever
(I00-I02)
I00
Rheumatic fever without mention of heart involvement
Includes:
I01
Arthritis, rheumatic, acute or subacute
Rheumatic fever with heart involvement
Excludes:
chronic diseases of rheumatic origin (I05-I09)unless rheumatic fever is also present or there is
evidence of recrudescence or activity of the rheumatic process.
I01.0 Acute rheumatic pericarditis
     Includes:
    Any condition in I00 with pericarditis
   Rheumatic pericarditis (acute)
  Excludes:
 when not specified as rheumatic (I30.-)
I01.1 Acute rheumatic endocarditis
     Includes:
    Acute rheumatic valvulitis
   Any condition in I00 with endocarditis or valvulitis
I01.2 Acute rheumatic myocarditis
     Includes:
    Any condition in I00 with myocarditis
I01.8 Other acute rheumatic heart disease
     Includes:
    Acute rheumatic pancarditis
   Any condition in I00 with other or multiple types of heart involvement
I01.9 Acute rheumatic heart disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Any condition in I00 with unspecified type of heart involvement
   Rheumatic:
  •
   carditis, acute
  •
   heart disease, active or acute
I02
Rheumatic chorea
Includes:
Excludes:
Sydenham's chorea
chorea:
•
NOS(G25.5)
•
Huntington (G10)
I02.0 Rheumatic chorea with heart involvement
     Includes:
    Chorea NOS with heart involvement
   Rheumatic chorea with heart involvement of any type classifiable under I01.-
I02.9 Rheumatic chorea without heart involvement
     Includes:
    Rheumatic chorea NOS
352
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
Chronic rheumatic heart diseases
(I05-I09)
I05
I07.9
Rheumatic mitral valve diseases
Includes:
Excludes:
conditions classifiable to (I05.0) and (I05.2-I05.9) whether specified as rheumatic or not
when specified as nonrheumatic (I34.-)
I05.0 Mitral stenosis
     Includes:
    Mitral (valve) obstruction (rheumatic)
I05.1 Rheumatic mitral insufficiency
     Includes:
    Rheumatic mitral:
   •
    incompetence
   •
    regurgitation
I05.2 Mitral stenosis with insufficiency
     Includes:
    Mitral stenosis with incompetence or regurgitation
I05.8 Other mitral valve diseases
     Includes:
    Mitral (valve) failure
   Excludes:
  that with mention of multiple valve involvement (I08.-)
I05.9 Mitral valve disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Mitral (valve) disorder (chronic) NOS
I06
Rheumatic aortic valve diseases
Excludes:
that with mention of multiple valve involvement (I08.-)
when not specified as rheumatic (I35.-)
I06.0 Rheumatic aortic stenosis
     Includes:
    Rheumatic aortic (valve) obstruction
I06.1 Rheumatic aortic insufficiency
     Includes:
    Rheumatic aortic:
   •
    incompetence
   •
    regurgitation
I06.2 Rheumatic aortic stenosis with insufficiency
     Includes:
    Rheumatic aortic stenosis with incompetence or regurgitation
I06.8 Other rheumatic aortic valve diseases
I06.9 Rheumatic aortic valve disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Rheumatic aortic (valve) disease NOS
I07
Rheumatic tricuspid valve diseases
Includes:
Excludes:
whether specified as rheumatic or of unspecified origin
that with mention of multiple valve involvement (I08.-)
when specified as nonrheumatic (I36.-)
I07.0 Tricuspid stenosis
     Includes:
    Tricuspid (valve) stenosis (rheumatic)
I07.1 Tricuspid insufficiency
     Includes:
    Tricuspid (valve) insufficiency (rheumatic)
I07.2 Tricuspid stenosis with insufficiency
I07.8 Other tricuspid valve diseases
I07.9 Tricuspid valve disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Tricuspid valve disorder NOS
353
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I08
Multiple valve diseases
Includes:
Excludes:
I08
whether specified as rheumatic or of unspecified origin
endocarditis, valve unspecified (I38)
multiple valve disease stated to be nonrheumatic (I34-I36)
multiple valve diseases of specified origin other than rheumatic heart disease (use appropriate
codes in I34-I38,Q22-Q23and Q248)
rheumatic diseases of endocardium, valve unspecified (I09.1)
I08.0 Disorders of both mitral and aortic valves
     Includes:
    Involvement of both mitral and aortic valves whether specified as rheumatic or of unspecified
   origin
I08.1 Disorders of both mitral and tricuspid valves
I08.2 Disorders of both aortic and tricuspid valves
I08.3 Combined disorders of mitral, aortic and tricuspid valves
I08.8 Other multiple valve diseases
I08.9 Multiple valve disease, unspecified
I09
Other rheumatic heart diseases
Use additional codes to identify any associated heart failure (I50.-)
I09.0
Rheumatic myocarditis
Includes:
chronic
inactive
Excludes:
rheumatic myocarditis
myocarditis not specified as rheumatic (I51.4)
I09.1 Rheumatic diseases of endocardium, valve unspecified
     Includes:
    Rheumatic:
   •
    endocarditis (chronic)
   •
    valvulitis (chronic)
   Excludes:
  endocarditis, valve unspecified (I38)
I09.2 Chronic rheumatic pericarditis
     Includes:
    Adherent pericardium, rheumatic
   Chronic rheumatic:
  •
   mediastinopericarditis
  •
   myopericarditis
  Excludes:
 when not specified as rheumatic (I31.-)
I09.8 Other specified rheumatic heart diseases
     Includes:
    Rheumatic disease of pulmonary valve
I09.9 Rheumatic heart disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Rheumatic:
   •
    carditis
   •
    heart failure
   Excludes:
  rheumatoid carditis (M05.3)
354
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
Hypertensive diseases
(I10-I15)
Excludes:
I10
I13
complicating pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O10-O11)(O13-O16)
involving coronary vessels (I20-I25)
neonatal hypertension (P29.2)
pulmonary hypertension (I27.0)
Essential (primary) hypertension
Excludes:
that involving vessels of:
•
brain (I60-I69)
•
eye (H35.0)
that with heart and kidney involvement (I13)
that with heart involvement (codes I50.-, I51.4-I51.9 due to hypertension) (I11)
that with kidney involvement (codes N00-N07, N18.-, N19 or N26 due to hypertension) (I12)
I10.0o Benign hypertension
      Includes:
     High blood pressure
    Hypertension (arterial)(essential)(NOS)(primary)(systemic)
I10.1o Malignant hypertension
I11
Hypertensive heart disease
Includes:
Hypertensive heart disease NOS
Use additional code to identify any (congestive) heart failure (I50.-) due to hypertension
I12
Hypertensive renal disease
Includes:
Arteriosclerosis of kidney
Arteriosclerotic nephritis (chronic)(interstitial)
Hypertensive nephropathy
Hypertensive renal disease NOS
Nephrosclerosis
Use additional code to identify any (chronic) kidney disease (failure) (N18.-,N19) due to hypertension
Excludes:
Secondary hypertension (I15.-)
I13
Hypertensive heart and renal disease
Includes:
Any condition in I11 with any condition in I12
disease:
•
cardiorenal
•
cardiovascular renal
•
hypertensive heart and renal disease NOS
Use additional code to identify any:
•
(chronic) kidney disease (failure) (N18.- , N19) due to hypertension
•
heart failure (I50.-) due to hypertension
355
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I15
Secondary hypertension
Excludes:
I15
involving vessels of:
•
brain (I60-I69)
•
eye (H35.0)
I15 Secondary hypertension Benign or Malignant
                           unspecified 
I15.0 Renovascular hypertension I15.00o I15.01o
I15.1 Hypertension secondary to other renal I15.10o I15.11o
disorders 
I15.2 Hypertension secondary to endocrine disorders I15.20o I15.21o
I15.8 Other secondary hypertension I15.80o I15.81o
I15.9 Secondary hypertension, unspecified I15.90o I15.91o
356
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
Ischaemic heart diseases
(I20-I25)
I21
Note:
For morbidity, duration as used in categories (I21, I22, I24 and I25) refers to the interval elapsing between onset
of the ischaemic episode and admission to care.
Includes:
with mention of hypertension (I10-I15)
Use additional code to identify presence of hypertension.
I20
Angina pectoris
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Excludes:
chronic ischaemic heart disease (I25.-)
I20.0 Unstable angina
     Includes:
    Acute coronary insufficiency
   Angina:
  •
   crescendo
  •
   de novo
  •
   worsening
  Intermediate coronary syndrome
 Preinfarction syndrome
Excludes:
post acute myocardial infarction angina (I23.8)
I20.1 Angina pectoris with documented spasm
     Includes:
    Angiospastic angina
   Prinzmetal angina
  Spasm-induced angina
 Variant angina
I20.8 Other forms of angina pectoris
I20.80o Atypical angina
I20.88o Other forms of angina pectoris
       Includes:
      Angina of effort
     Exertional angina
    Stable angina
   Stenocardia
  Typical angina
I20.9 Angina pectoris, unspecified
     Includes:
    Angina:
   •
    NOS
   •
    cardiac
   Anginal syndrome
  Ischaemic chest pain
I21
Acute myocardial infarction
Includes:
myocardial infarction specified as acute or with a stated duration of 4 weeks (28 days) or less
from onset
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Use additional code from subcategory (R94.3-) to identify abnormal results of cardiovascular function studies
Excludes:
certain current complications following acute myocardial infarction (I23.-)
myocardial infarction:
•
old (I25.2)
•
specified as chronic or with a stated duration of more than 4 weeks (more than 28 days) from
onset (I25.8)
•
subsequent (I22.-)
postmyocardial infarction syndrome (I24.1)
357
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I21.0 Acute transmural myocardial infarction of anterior wall
     Includes:
    Transmural infarction (Q-wave)(acute)(of):
   •
    anterior (wall) NOS
   •
    anteroapical
   •
    anterolateral
   •
    anteroseptal
I21.1 Acute transmural myocardial infarction of inferior wall
     Includes:
    Transmural infarction (Q-wave)(acute)(of):
   •
    diaphragmatic wall
   •
    inferior (wall) NOS
   •
    inferolateral
   •
    inferoposterior
I21.2 Acute transmural myocardial infarction of other sites
     Includes:
    Transmural infarction (Q-wave)(acute)(of):
   •
    apical-lateral
   •
    basal-lateral
   •
    high lateral
   •
    lateral (wall) NOS
   •
    posterior (true)
   •
    posterobasal
   •
    posterolateral
   •
    posteroseptal
   •
    septal NOS
I21.3 Acute transmural myocardial infarction of unspecified site
     Includes:
    Transmural (Q-wave) myocardial infarction NOS
I21.4 Acute subendocardial myocardial infarction
     Includes:
    Non-Q-wave myocardial infarction
I21.9 Acute myocardial infarction, unspecified
     Includes:
    Myocardial infarction (acute) NOS
I21.0
I22
Subsequent myocardial infarction
Note:
For morbidity coding, this category should be assigned for infarction of any myocardial site,
occurring within 4 weeks (28 days) from onset of a previous infarction
Includes:
•
•
•
further extension of
recurrent
reinfarction
myocardial infarction
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Use additional code from subcategory (R94.3-) to identify abnormal results of cardiovascular function studies
Excludes:
specified as chronic or with a stated duration of more than 4 weeks (more than 28 days) from
onset (I25.8)
I22.0 Subsequent myocardial infarction of anterior wall
     Includes:
    Subsequent infarction (acute)(of):
   •
    anterior (wall) NOS
   •
    anteroapical
   •
    anterolateral
   •
    anteroseptal
I22.1 Subsequent myocardial infarction of inferior wall
     Includes:
    Subsequent infarction (acute)(of):
   •
    diaphragmatic wall
   •
    inferior (wall) NOS
   •
    inferolateral
   •
    inferoposterior
358
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
I22.8
I22.9
I23
Subsequent myocardial infarction of other sites
Includes:
Subsequent myocardial infarction (acute)(of):
•
apical-lateral
•
basal-lateral
•
high lateral
•
lateral (wall) NOS
•
posterior (true)
•
posterobasal
•
posterolateral
•
posteroseptal
•
septal NOS
I24.0
Subsequent myocardial infarction of unspecified site
Certain current complications following acute myocardial infarction
Excludes:
the listed conditions, when:
•
concurrent with acute myocardial infarction (I21-I22)
•
not specified as current complications following acute myocardial infarction (I31.-)(I51.-)
I23.0 Haemopericardium as current complication following acute myocardial infarction
     Includes:
    Rupture, cardiac (wall) with haemopericardium as current complication following acute
   myocardial infarction
I23.1 Atrial septal defect as current complication following acute myocardial infarction
I23.2 Ventricular septal defect as current complication following acute myocardial infarction
I23.3 Rupture of cardiac wall without haemopericardium as current complication following acute
     myocardial infarction
    Includes:
   False aneurysm of cardiac wall as current complication following acute myocardial infarction
  Excludes:
 with haemopericardium (I23.0)
I23.4 Rupture of chordae tendineae as current complication following acute myocardial infarction
I23.5 Rupture of papillary muscle as current complication following acute myocardial infarction
I23.6 Thrombosis of atrium, auricular appendage, and ventricle as current complications following
     acute myocardial infarction
I23.8 Other current complications following acute myocardial infarction
I23.80o Papillary muscle dysfunction as current complication following acute myocardial infarction
I23.81o Pericarditis as current complication following acute myocardial infarction
I23.82o Postmyocardial infarction angina as current complication following acute myocardial
       infarction
      Includes:
     Angina within four weeks of acute myocardial infarction
    Excludes:
   post myocardial infarction syndrome (I24.1)
I23.88o Other current complications following acute myocardial infarction
I24
Other acute ischaemic heart diseases
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Excludes:
angina pectoris (I20.-)
transient myocardial ischaemia of newborn (P29.4)
I24.0
Coronary thrombosis not resulting in myocardial infarction
Includes:
Coronary (artery)(vein):
•
•
•
embolism
occlusion
thromboembolism
not resulting in myocardial infarction
Use additional code from subcategory (R94.3-) to identify abnormal results of cardiovascular function studies
Excludes:
specified as chronic or with a stated duration of more than 4 weeks (more than 28 days) from
onset (I25.8)
359
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I24.1 Dressler's syndrome
     Includes:
    Postmyocardial infarction syndrome
   Excludes:
  post myocardial infarction angina (I23.82)
I24.8 Other forms of acute ischaemic heart disease
I24.9 Acute ischaemic heart disease, unspecified
     Excludes:
    ischaemic heart disease (chronic) NOS (I25.9)
I24.1
I25
Chronic ischaemic heart disease
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Excludes:
cardiovascular disease NOS (I51.6)
I25.0 Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, so described
I25.1 Atherosclerotic heart disease
     Includes:
    Coronary (artery):
   •
    atheroma
   •
    atherosclerosis
   •
    disease
   •
    sclerosis
I25.10o Atherosclerotic heart disease of native coronary artery
I25.11o Atherosclerotic heart disease of autologous vein bypass graft
I25.12o Atherosclerotic heart disease of nonautologous biological bypass graft
I25.13o Atherosclerotic heart disease of artery bypass graft
       Includes:
      Internal mammary artery
I25.14o Atherosclerotic heart disease of unspecified type of bypass graft
       Includes:
      Bypass graft NOS
I25.15o Atherosclerotic heart disease of coronary artery of transplanted heart
I25.19o Atherosclerotic heart disease of unspecified type of vessel, native or graft
       Includes:
      Atherosclerotic heart disease NOS [ASHD]
I25.2 Old myocardial infarction
     Includes:
    Healed myocardial infarction
   Past myocardial infarction diagnosed by ECG or other special investigation, but currently
  presenting no symptoms.
I25.3 Aneurysm of heart
     Includes:
    Aneurysm:
   •
    mural
   •
    ventricular
   Excludes:
  false aneurysm of cardiac wall as current complication of acute myocardial infarction (see I23.3)
I25.4 Coronary artery aneurysm
     Includes:
    Coronary arteriovenous fistula, acquired
   Excludes:
  congenital coronary (artery) aneurysm (Q24.5)
I25.5 Ischaemic cardiomyopathy
I25.6 Silent myocardial ischaemia
I25.8 Other forms of chronic ischaemic heart disease
     Includes:
    Any condition in (I21-I22) and (I24.-) specified as chronic or with a stated duration of more than
   4 weeks (more than 28 days) from onset.
I25.9 Chronic ischaemic heart disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Ischaemic heart disease (chronic) NOS
360
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
Pulmonary heart disease and diseases of pulmonary circulation
(I26-I28)
I26
I28.9
Pulmonary embolism
Includes:
Excludes:
pulmonary (artery)(vein):
•
infarction
•
thromboembolism
•
thrombosis
complicating:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07)(O08.2)
•
pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O88.-)
I26.0 Pulmonary embolism with mention of acute cor pulmonale
     Includes:
    Acute cor pulmonale NOS
I26.9 Pulmonary embolism without mention of acute cor pulmonale
     Includes:
    Pulmonary embolism NOS
I27
Other pulmonary heart diseases
I27.0 Primary pulmonary hypertension
I27.1 Kyphoscoliotic heart disease
I27.2 Other secondary pulmonary hypertension
     Use additional code to identify the underlying cause
I27.8 Other specified pulmonary heart diseases
     Excludes:
    Eisenmenger's defect (Q21.8)
I27.9 Pulmonary heart disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Chronic cardiopulmonary disease
   Cor pulmonale (chronic) NOS
I28
Other diseases of pulmonary vessels
I28.0 Arteriovenous fistula of pulmonary vessels
I28.1 Aneurysm of pulmonary artery
I28.8 Other specified diseases of pulmonary vessels
     Includes:
    Rupture
   Stenosis
  of pulmonary vessel
 Stricture
I28.9 Disease of pulmonary vessels, unspecified
361
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I30
Other forms of heart disease
(I30-I52)
I30
Acute pericarditis
Includes:
Excludes:
acute pericardial effusion
rheumatic pericarditis (acute) (I01.0)
I30.0 Acute nonspecific idiopathic pericarditis
I30.1 Infective pericarditis
     Includes:
    Pericarditis:
   •
    pneumococcal
   •
    purulent
   •
    staphylococcal
   •
    streptococcal
   •
    viral
   Pyopericarditis
  Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
I30.8 Other forms of acute pericarditis
I30.9 Acute pericarditis, unspecified
I31
Other diseases of pericardium
Excludes:
current complications following acute myocardial infarction (I23.-)
postcardiotomy syndrome (I97.0)
trauma (S26.-)
when specified as rheumatic (I09.2)
I31.0 Chronic adhesive pericarditis
     Includes:
    Accretio cordis
   Adherent pericardium
  Adhesive mediastinopericarditis
I31.1 Chronic constrictive pericarditis
     Includes:
    Concretio cordis
   Pericardial calcification
I31.2 Haemopericardium, not elsewhere classified
I31.3 Pericardial effusion (noninflammatory)
     Includes:
    Chylopericardium
I31.8 Other specified diseases of pericardium
     Includes:
    Epicardial plaques
   Focal pericardial adhesions
I31.9 Disease of pericardium, unspecified
     Includes:
    Cardiac tamponade
   Pericarditis (chronic) NOS
I32*
Pericarditis in diseases classified elsewhere
I32.0* Pericarditis in bacterial diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Pericarditis:
    •
     gonococcal (A54.8†)
      •
       meningococcal (A39.5†)
        •
         syphilitic (A52.0†)
          •
           tuberculous (A18.8†)
I32.1* Pericarditis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
362
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
I32.8*
I33
Pericarditis in other diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Pericarditis (in):
•
rheumatoid (M05.3†)
•
systemic lupus erythematosus (M32.1†)
•
uraemic (N18.5†)
I35.0
Acute and subacute endocarditis
Excludes:
acute rheumatic endocarditis (I01.1)
endocarditis NOS (I38)
I33.0 Acute and subacute infective endocarditis
     Includes:
    Endocarditis (acute)(subacute):
   •
    Bacterial
   •
    Infective NOS
   •
    Lenta
   •
    Malignant
   •
    Septic
   •
    Ulcerative
   Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
I33.9 Acute endocarditis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Endocarditis
   Myoendocarditis
  Periendocarditis
I34
Nonrheumatic mitral valve disorders
Excludes:
I34.0
acute or subacute
mitral (valve):
•
disease (I05.9)
•
failure (I05.8)
•
stenosis (I05.0)
specified as congenital :
•
insufficiency (Q23.3)
•
stenosis (Q23.2)
specified as rheumatic (I05.-)
when of unspecified cause but with mention of:
•
diseases of aortic valve (I08.0)
•
mitral stenosis or obstruction (I05.0)
Mitral (valve) insufficiency
Includes:
Mitral (valve)
•
incompetence
•
regurgitation
NOS or of specified cause, except rheumatic
I34.1 Mitral (valve) prolapse
     Includes:
    Floppy mitral valve syndrome
   Excludes:
  Marfan's syndrome (Q87.4)
I34.2 Nonrheumatic mitral (valve) stenosis
I34.8 Other nonrheumatic mitral valve disorders
I34.9 Nonrheumatic mitral valve disorder, unspecified
I35
Nonrheumatic aortic valve disorders
Excludes:
I35.0
hypertrophic subaortic stenosis (I42.1)
when:
•
of unspecified cause but with mention of diseases of mitral valve (I08.0)
•
specified as congenital (Q23.0, Q23.1)
•
specified as rheumatic (I06.-)
Aortic (valve) stenosis
363
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I35.1
I35.1
Aortic (valve) insufficiency
Includes:
Aortic (valve)
•
incompetence
•
regurgitation
NOS or of specified cause, except rheumatic
I35.2 Aortic (valve) stenosis with insufficiency
I35.8 Other aortic valve disorders
I35.9 Aortic valve disorder, unspecified
I36
Nonrheumatic tricuspid valve disorders
Excludes:
when:
•
of unspecified cause (I07.-)
•
specified as congenital (Q22.4, Q22.8, Q22.9)
•
specified as rheumatic (I07.-)
I36.0 Nonrheumatic tricuspid (valve) stenosis
I36.1 Nonrheumatic tricuspid (valve) insufficiency
     Includes:
    Tricuspid (valve)
   •
    incompetence
   of specified cause, except rheumatic
  •
   regurgitation
I36.2 Nonrheumatic tricuspid (valve) stenosis with insufficiency
I36.8 Other nonrheumatic tricuspid valve disorders
I36.9 Nonrheumatic tricuspid valve disorder, unspecified
I37
Pulmonary valve disorders
Excludes:
when specified as congenital (Q22.1, Q22.2, Q22.3)
when specified as rheumatic (I09.8)
I37.0 Pulmonary valve stenosis
I37.1 Pulmonary valve insufficiency
     Includes:
    Pulmonary valve
   •
    incompetence
   •
    regurgitation
NOS or of specified cause, except rheumatic
I37.2 Pulmonary valve stenosis with insufficiency
I37.8 Other pulmonary valve disorders
I37.9 Pulmonary valve disorder, unspecified
I38 Endocarditis, valve unspecified
Includes:
Excludes:
364
Endocarditis (chronic) NOS
Valvular
incompetence
insufficiency
regurgitation
stenosis
of unspecified valve, NOS or of specified cause, except rheumatic or
congenital
Valvulitis (chronic) of unspecified valve, NOS or of specified cause, except rheumatic or
congenital
endocardial fibroelastosis (I42.4)
when specified as congenital (I42.4)
when specified as rheumatic (I09.1)
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
I39*
Endocarditis and heart valve disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
endocardial involvement in:
•
candidal infection (B37.6†)
•
gonococcal infection (A54.8†)
•
Libman-Sacks disease (M32.1†)
•
meningococcal infection (A39.5†)
•
rheumatoid arthritis (M05.3†)
•
syphilis (A52.0†)
•
tuberculosis (A18.8†)
•
typhoid fever (A01.0†)
I39.0* Mitral valve disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
I39.1* Aortic valve disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
I39.2* Tricuspid valve disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
I39.3* Pulmonary valve disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
I39.4* Multiple valve disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
I39.8* 
I42
Endocarditis, valve unspecified, in diseases classified elsewhere
I40
Acute myocarditis
I40.0 Infective myocarditis
     Includes:
    Septic myocarditis
   Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
I40.1 Isolated myocarditis
I40.8 Other acute myocarditis
I40.9 Acute myocarditis, unspecified
I41*
Myocarditis in diseases classified elsewhere
I41.0* Myocarditis in bacterial diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Myocarditis:
    •
     diphtheritic (A36.8†)
      •
       gonococcal (A54.8†)
        •
         meningococcal (A39.5†)
          •
           syphilitic (A52.0†)
            •
             tuberculous (A18.8†)
I41.1* Myocarditis in viral diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Influenzal myocarditis (acute):
    •
     avian influenza virus identified (J09†)
      •
       other virus identified (J10.8†)
        •
         virus not identified (J11.8†)
          Mumps myocarditis (B26.8†)
I41.2* Myocarditis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Myocarditis in:
    •
     Chagas' disease:
    •
     (acute) (B57.0†)
      •
       (chronic) (B57.2†)
        •
         toxoplasmosis (B58.8†)
I41.8* Myocarditis in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Rheumatoid myocarditis (M05.3†)
      Sarcoid myocarditis (D86.8†)
I42
Cardiomyopathy
Excludes:
cardiomyopathy complicating:
•
pregnancy (O99.4)
•
puerperium (O90.3)
ischaemic cardiomyopathy (I25.5)
365
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I42.0 
I42.0
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Includes:
Congestive cardiomyopathy
I42.1 Obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
     Includes:
    Hypertrophic subaortic stenosis
I42.2 Other hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
     Includes:
    Nonobstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
I42.3 Endomyocardial (eosinophilic) disease
     Includes:
    Endomyocardial (tropical) fibrosis
   Löffler's endocarditis
I42.4 Endocardial fibroelastosis
     Includes:
    Congenital cardiomyopathy
I42.5 Other restrictive cardiomyopathy
     Includes:
    Constrictive cardiomyopathy NOS
I42.6 Alcoholic cardiomyopathy
I42.7 Cardiomyopathy due to drugs and other external agents
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
I42.8 Other cardiomyopathies
I42.9 Cardiomyopathy, unspecified
     Includes:
    Cardiomyopathy (primary) (secondary) NOS
   Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth characters .52 to classify any associated
  diabetes mellitus.
I43*
Cardiomyopathy in diseases classified elsewhere
I43.0* Cardiomyopathy in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Cardiomyopathy in diphtheria (A36.8†)
I43.1* Cardiomyopathy in metabolic diseases
      Includes:
     Cardiac amyloidosis (E85.-†)
I43.2* Cardiomyopathy in nutritional diseases
      Includes:
     Nutritional cardiomyopathy NOS (E63.9†)
I43.8* Cardiomyopathy in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Gouty tophi of heart (M10.0†)
      Thyrotoxic heart disease (E05.9†)
I44 Atrioventricular and left bundle-branch block
I44.0 Atrioventricular block, first degree
I44.1 Atrioventricular block, second degree
     Includes:
    Atrioventricular block, type I and II
   Möbitz block, type I and II
   Second-degree block, type I and II
  Wenckebach's block
I44.2 Atrioventricular block, complete
     Includes:
    Complete heart block NOS
   Third-degree block
I44.3 Other and unspecified atrioventricular block
     Includes:
    Atrioventricular block NOS
I44.4 Left anterior fascicular block
I44.5 Left posterior fascicular block
366
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
I44.6 Other and unspecified fascicular block
     Includes:
    Left bundle-branch hemiblock NOS
I44.7 Left bundle-branch block, unspecified
I45
I46.9
Other conduction disorders
I45.0 Right fascicular block
I45.1 Other and unspecified right bundle-branch block
     Includes:
    Right bundle-branch block NOS
I45.2 Bifascicular block
I45.3 Trifascicular block
I45.4 Nonspecific intraventricular block
     Includes:
    Bundle-branch block NOS
I45.5 Other specified heart block
     Includes:
    Sinoatrial block
   Sinoauricular block
  Excludes:
 heart block NOS (I45.9)
I45.6 Pre-excitation syndrome
     Includes:
    Anomalous atrioventricular excitation
   Atrioventricular conduction:
  •
   accelerated
  •
   accessory
  •
   pre-excitation
  Lown-Ganong-Levine syndrome
 Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
I45.8 Other specified conduction disorders
     Includes:
    Atrioventricular [AV] dissociation
   Interference dissociation
  Long QT syndrome
 Excludes:
prolongation of QT interval (R94.38)
I45.9 Conduction disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Heart block NOS
   Stokes-Adams syndrome
I46
Cardiac arrest
Excludes:
cardiogenic shock (R57.0)
complicating:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07) (O08.8)
•
obstetric surgery and procedures (O75.4)
coronary arrest of newborn (infant) (P29.10)
neonatal cardiac arrest (P29.10)
I46.0 Cardiac arrest with successful resuscitation
I46.1 Sudden cardiac death, so described
     Excludes:
    sudden death:
   •
    NOS (R96.-)
   •
    with:
   •
    conduction disorder (I44-I45)
   •
    myocardial infarction (I21-I22)
I46.9 Cardiac arrest, unspecified
367
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I47
Paroxysmal tachycardia
Excludes:
I47
complicating:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07) (O08.8)
•
obstetric surgery and procedures (O75.4)
tachycardia :
•
NOS (R00.0)
•
sinoauricular NOS (R00.0)
•
sinus [sinusal] NOS (R00.0)
I47.0 Re-entry ventricular arrhythmia
I47.1 Supraventricular tachycardia
     Includes:
    Paroxysmal tachycardia:
   •
    atrial
   •
    atrioventricular [AV]
   •
    junctional
   •
    nodal
I47.2 Ventricular tachycardia
I47.9 Paroxysmal tachycardia, unspecified
     Includes:
    Bouveret(-Hoffmann) syndrome
I48
Atrial fibrillation and flutter
I48.0o Atrial fibrillation
I48.1o Atrial flutter
I49
Other cardiac arrhythmias
Excludes:
bradycardia :
•
NOS (R00.1)
•
sinoatrial NOS (R00.1)
•
sinus (R00.1)
•
vagal (R00.1)
complicating:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07) (O08.8)
•
obstetric surgery and procedures (O75.4)
neonatal cardiac dysrhythmia (P29.18)
I49.0 Ventricular fibrillation and flutter
I49.00o Ventricular fibrillation
I49.01o Ventricular flutter
I49.1 Atrial premature depolarization
     Includes:
    Atrial premature beats
I49.2 Junctional premature depolarization
I49.3 Ventricular premature depolarization
I49.4 Other and unspecified premature depolarization
     Includes:
    Ectopic beats
   Extrasystoles
  Extrasystolic arrhythmias
 Premature:
•
 beats NOS
•
 contractions
I49.5 Sick sinus syndrome
     Includes:
    Tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome
I49.8 Other specified cardiac arrhythmias
     Includes:
    Rhythm disorder:
   •
    coronary sinus
   •
    ectopic
   •
    nodal
368
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
I49.9
I50
Cardiac arrhythmia, unspecified
Includes:
Arrhythmia (cardiac) NOS
I51.6
Heart failure
Use additional code from (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes mellitus.
Use additional code from (I11) (hypertensive heart disease) or (I13) (hypertensive heart and renal disease) for
heart failure due to hypertension
Excludes:
complicating:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07) (O08.8)
•
obstetric surgery and procedures (O75.4)
following cardiac surgery or due to presence of cardiac prosthesis (I97.1)
neonatal cardiac failure (P29.0)
I50.0 Congestive heart failure
     Includes:
    Congestive heart disease (CHF)
   Right ventricular failure (secondary to left heart failure)
  Excludes:
 fluid overload NOS (E87.7)
I50.1 Left ventricular failure
     Includes:
    Cardiac asthma
   Left heart failure
  Oedema of lung
 Pulmonary oedema
I50.9
I51
with mention of heart disease NOS or heart failure
Heart failure, unspecified
Includes:
Cardiac, heart or myocardial failure NOS
Complications and ill-defined descriptions of heart disease
Excludes:
any condition in I51.4 - I51.9 due to hypertension (I11):
•
with renal disease (I13)
complications following acute myocardial infarction (I23.-)
when specified as rheumatic (I00-I09)
I51.0 Cardiac septal defect, acquired
     Includes:
    Acquired septal defect (old):
   •
    atrial
   •
    auricular
   •
    ventricular
I51.1 Rupture of chordae tendineae, not elsewhere classified
I51.2 Rupture of papillary muscle, not elsewhere classified
I51.3 Intracardiac thrombosis, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Thrombosis (old):
   •
    apical
   •
    atrial
   •
    auricular
   •
    ventricular
I51.4 Myocarditis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Myocardial fibrosis
   Myocarditis:
  •
   NOS
  •
   chronic (interstitial)
I51.5 Myocardial degeneration
     Includes:
    Degeneration of heart or myocardium:
   •
    fatty
   •
    senile
   Myocardial disease
I51.6 Cardiovascular disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Cardiovascular accident NOS
   Excludes:
  atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, so described (I25.0)
369
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I51.7 Cardiomegaly
     Includes:
    Cardiac:
   •
    dilatation
   •
    hypertrophy
   Ventricular dilatation
I51.8 Other ill-defined heart diseases
     Includes:
    Carditis (acute)(chronic)
   Pancarditis (acute)(chronic)
I51.9 Heart disease, unspecified
I51.7
I52*
Other heart disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Excludes:
cardiovascular disorders NOS in diseases classified elsewhere (I98.-*)
I52.0* Other heart disorders in bacterial diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Meningococcal carditis NEC (A39.5†)
I52.1* Other heart disorders in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Pulmonary heart disease in schistosomiasis (B65.-†)
I52.8* Other heart disorders in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Rheumatoid carditis (M05.3†)
370
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
Cerebrovascular diseases
(I60-I69)
I61.9
Includes:
with mention of hypertension (conditions in I10) and (I15.-)
Use additional code to identify presence of hypertension.
Excludes:
transient cerebral ischaemic attacks and related syndromes (G45.-)
traumatic intracranial haemorrhage (S06.-)
vascular dementia (F01.-)
I60
Subarachnoid haemorrhage
Includes:
ruptured cerebral aneurysm
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Excludes:
sequelae of subarachnoid haemorrhage (I69.0)
I60.0 Subarachnoid haemorrhage from carotid siphon and bifurcation
I60.1 Subarachnoid haemorrhage from middle cerebral artery
I60.2 Subarachnoid haemorrhage from anterior communicating artery
I60.3 Subarachnoid haemorrhage from posterior communicating artery
I60.4 Subarachnoid haemorrhage from basilar artery
I60.5 Subarachnoid haemorrhage from vertebral artery
I60.6 Subarachnoid haemorrhage from other intracranial arteries
     Includes:
    Multiple involvement of intracranial arteries
I60.7 Subarachnoid haemorrhage from intracranial artery, unspecified
     Includes:
    Ruptured (congenital) berry aneurysm NOS
   Subarachnoid haemorrhage from:
  •
   cerebral
  artery NOS
 •
  communicating
I60.8 Other subarachnoid haemorrhage
     Includes:
    Meningeal haemorrhage
   Rupture of cerebral arteriovenous malformation
I60.9 Subarachnoid haemorrhage, unspecified
     Includes:
    Ruptured (congenital) cerebral aneurysm NOS
I61
Intracerebral haemorrhage
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Excludes:
sequelae of intracerebral haemorrhage (I69.1)
I61.0 Intracerebral haemorrhage in hemisphere, subcortical
     Includes:
    Deep intracerebral haemorrhage
I61.1 Intracerebral haemorrhage in hemisphere, cortical
     Includes:
    Cerebral lobe haemorrhage
   Superficial intracerebral haemorrhage
I61.2 Intracerebral haemorrhage in hemisphere, unspecified
I61.3 Intracerebral haemorrhage in brain stem
I61.4 Intracerebral haemorrhage in cerebellum
I61.5 Intracerebral haemorrhage, intraventricular
I61.6 Intracerebral haemorrhage, multiple localized
I61.8 Other intracerebral haemorrhage
I61.9 Intracerebral haemorrhage, unspecified
371
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I62
Other nontraumatic intracranial haemorrhage
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Excludes:
sequelae of intracranial haemorrhage (I69.2)
I62
I62.0 Subdural haemorrhage (acute)(nontraumatic)
I62.1 Nontraumatic extradural haemorrhage
     Includes:
    Nontraumatic epidural haemorrhage
I62.9 Intracranial haemorrhage (nontraumatic), unspecified
I63
Cerebral infarction
Includes:
occlusion and stenosis of cerebral and precerebral arteries, resulting in cerebral infarction
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Excludes:
sequelae of cerebral infarction (I69.3)
I63.0 Cerebral infarction due to thrombosis of precerebral arteries
I63.1 Cerebral infarction due to embolism of precerebral arteries
I63.2 Cerebral infarction due to unspecified occlusion or stenosis of precerebral arteries
I63.3 Cerebral infarction due to thrombosis of cerebral arteries
I63.4 Cerebral infarction due to embolism of cerebral arteries
I63.5 Cerebral infarction due to unspecified occlusion or stenosis of cerebral arteries
I63.6 Cerebral infarction due to cerebral venous thrombosis, nonpyogenic
I63.8 Other cerebral infarction
I63.9 Cerebral infarction, unspecified
I64
Stroke, not specified as haemorrhage or infarction
Includes:
Cerebrovascular accident (CVA) NOS
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Excludes:
sequelae of stroke (I69.4)
I65
Occlusion and stenosis of precerebral arteries, not resulting in cerebral
infarction
Includes:
embolism
narrowing
of basilar, carotid or vertebral arteries, not resulting in cerebral
obstruction
infarction
(complete)(partial)
thrombosis
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Excludes:
when causing cerebral infarction (I63.-)
I65.0 Occlusion and stenosis of vertebral artery
I65.1 Occlusion and stenosis of basilar artery
I65.2 Occlusion and stenosis of carotid artery
I65.3 Occlusion and stenosis of multiple and bilateral precerebral arteries
I65.8 Occlusion and stenosis of other precerebral artery
I65.9 Occlusion and stenosis of unspecified precerebral artery
     Includes:
    Precerebral artery NOS
372
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
I66
Occlusion and stenosis of cerebral arteries, not resulting in cerebral
infarction
I67.9
Includes:
embolism
narrowing
obstruction (complete)(partial)
thrombosis
of middle, anterior and posterior cerebral arteries, and
cerebellar arteries, not resulting in cerebral infarction
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Excludes:
when causing cerebral infarction (I63.-)
I66.0 Occlusion and stenosis of middle cerebral artery
I66.1 Occlusion and stenosis of anterior cerebral artery
I66.2 Occlusion and stenosis of posterior cerebral artery
I66.3 Occlusion and stenosis of cerebellar arteries
I66.4 Occlusion and stenosis of multiple and bilateral cerebral arteries
I66.8 Occlusion and stenosis of other cerebral artery
     Includes:
    Occlusion and stenosis of perforating arteries
I66.9 Occlusion and stenosis of unspecified cerebral artery
I67
Other cerebrovascular diseases
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Excludes:
sequelae of the listed conditions (I69.8)
I67.0 Dissection of cerebral arteries, nonruptured
     Excludes:
    ruptured cerebral arteries (I60.7)
I67.1 Cerebral aneurysm, nonruptured
     Includes:
    Cerebral:
   •
    aneurysm NOS
   •
    arteriovenous fistula, acquired
   Excludes:
  congenital cerebral aneurysm, nonruptured (Q28.-)
 ruptured cerebral aneurysm (I60.-)
I67.2 Cerebral atherosclerosis
     Includes:
    Atheroma of cerebral arteries
I67.3 Progressive vascular leukoencephalopathy
     Includes:
    Binswanger's disease
   Excludes:
  subcortical vascular dementia (F01.2)
I67.4 Hypertensive encephalopathy
I67.5 Moyamoya disease
I67.6 Nonpyogenic thrombosis of intracranial venous system
     Includes:
    Nonpyogenic thrombosis of:
   •
    cerebral vein
   •
    intracranial venous sinus
   Excludes:
  when causing infarction (I63.6)
I67.7 Cerebral arteritis, not elsewhere classified
I67.8 Other specified cerebrovascular diseases
     Includes:
    Acute cerebrovascular insufficiency NOS
   Cerebral ischaemia (chronic)
I67.9 Cerebrovascular disease, unspecified
373
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I68*
I68*
Cerebrovascular disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
I68.0* Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (E85.4†)
I68.1* Cerebral arteritis in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Cerebral arteritis:
    •
     listerial (A32.8†)
      •
       syphilitic (A52.0†)
        •
         tuberculous (A18.8†)
I68.2* Cerebral arteritis in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Cerebral arteritis in systemic lupus erythematosus (M32.1†)
I68.8* Other cerebrovascular disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Uraemic apoplexia in chronic kidney disease (N18.5†)
I69
Sequelae of cerebrovascular disease
Note:
Category I69 is to be used to indicate previous episodes of conditions in (I60-I67.1) and (I67.4-
I67.9) as the cause of sequelae, themselves classified elsewhere. The "sequelae" include
conditions specified as such or as late effects, or those present one year or more after onset of
the causal condition. Not to be used for chronic cerebrovascular disease. Code these to (I60-
I67).
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .52 to classify any associated diabetes
mellitus.
Excludes:
sequelae of traumatic intracranial injury (T90.5)
I69.0 Sequelae of subarachnoid haemorrhage
I69.1 Sequelae of intracerebral haemorrhage
I69.2 Sequelae of other nontraumatic intracranial haemorrhage
I69.3 Sequelae of cerebral infarction
I69.4 Sequelae of stroke, not specified as haemorrhage or infarction
I69.8 Sequelae of other and unspecified cerebrovascular diseases
Diseases of arteries, arterioles and capillaries
(I70-I79)
I70
Atherosclerosis
Includes:
Excludes:
arteriolosclerosis
arteriosclerosis
arteriosclerotic vascular disease
atheroma
degeneration:
•
arterial
•
arteriovascular
•
vascular
endarteritis deformans or obliterans
senile:
•
arteritis
•
endarteritis
cerebral (I67.2)
coronary (I25.1)
mesenteric (K55.1)
pulmonary (I27.0)
I70.0 Atherosclerosis of aorta
I70.1 Atherosclerosis of renal artery
     Includes:
    Goldblatt's kidney
   Excludes:
  atherosclerosis of renal arterioles (I12)
374
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
I70.2
Atherosclerosis of arteries of extremities
Includes:
Atherosclerosis of (autologous) (bypass) (nonautologous) grafts of arteries of extremities
Mönckeberg's (medial) sclerosis
I70.20o Atherosclerosis of arteries of extremities without gangrene
       Includes:
      That with intermittent claudication, rest pain and ulceration
     Use additional code for any associated ulcer (L97) (L98.4)
I70.21o Atherosclerosis of arteries of extremities with gangrene
       Includes:
      Atherosclerotic gangrene
I70.8 Atherosclerosis of other arteries
I70.9 
I72.8
Generalized and unspecified atherosclerosis
I71
Aortic aneurysm and dissection
I71.0 Dissection of aorta [any part]
     Includes:
    Dissecting aneurysm of aorta (ruptured) [any part]
I71.1 Thoracic aortic aneurysm, ruptured
I71.2 Thoracic aortic aneurysm, without mention of rupture
I71.3 Abdominal aortic aneurysm, ruptured
I71.4 Abdominal aortic aneurysm, without mention of rupture
I71.5 Thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm, ruptured
I71.6 Thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm, without mention of rupture
I71.8 Aortic aneurysm of unspecified site, ruptured
     Includes:
    Rupture of aorta NOS
I71.9 Aortic aneurysm of unspecified site, without mention of rupture
     Includes:
    Aneurysm
   Dilatation
  of aorta
 Hyaline necrosis
I72
Other aneurysm and dissection
Includes:
Excludes:
aneurysm (cirsoid)(false)(ruptured)
aneurysm (of):
•
aorta (I71.-)
•
arteriovenous NOS (Q27.3):
•
acquired (I77.0)
•
cerebral (nonruptured) (I67.1):
•
ruptured (I60.-)
•
coronary (I25.4)
•
heart (I25.3)
•
pulmonary artery (I28.1)
•
retinal (H35.0)
•
varicose (I77.0)
dissection of precerebral artery, congenital (nonruptured) (Q28.1)
I72.0 Aneurysm and dissection of carotid artery
I72.1 Aneurysm and dissection of artery of upper extremity
I72.2 Aneurysm and dissection of renal artery
I72.3 Aneurysm and dissection of iliac artery
I72.4 Aneurysm and dissection of artery of lower extremity
I72.5 Aneurysm and dissection of other precerebral arteries
     Excludes:
    aneurysm and dissection of carotid artery (I72.0)
I72.8 Aneurysm and dissection of other specified arteries
375
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I72.9
I72.9
I73
Aneurysm and dissection of unspecified site
Other peripheral vascular diseases
Excludes:
chilblains (T69.1)
frostbite (T33-T35)
immersion hand or foot (T69.0)
spasm of cerebral artery (G45.9)
I73.0 Raynaud's syndrome
     Includes:
    Raynaud's:
   •
    disease
   •
    gangrene
   •
    phenomenon (secondary)
I73.1 Thromboangiitis obliterans [Buerger]
I73.8 Other specified peripheral vascular diseases
     Includes:
    Acrocyanosis
   Acroparaesthesia:
  •
   simple [Schultze's type]
  •
   vasomotor [Nothnagel's type]
  Erythrocyanosis
 Erythromelalgia
I73.9 Peripheral vascular disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Intermittent claudication
   Spasm of artery
I74
Arterial embolism and thrombosis
Includes:
Excludes:
infarction:
•
embolic
•
thrombotic
occlusion:
•
embolic
•
thrombotic
embolism and thrombosis:
•
basilar (I63.0-I63.2, I65.1)
•
carotid (I63.0-I63.2,I65.2)
•
cerebral (I63.3-I63.5,I66.9)
•
complicating:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07, O08.2)
•
pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O88.-)
•
coronary (I21-I25)
•
mesenteric (K55.0)
•
precerebral (I63.0-I63.2,I65.9)
•
pulmonary (I26.-)
•
renal (N28.0)
•
retinal (H34.-)
•
vertebral (I63.0-I63.2,I65.0)
I74.0 Embolism and thrombosis of abdominal aorta
     Includes:
    Aortic bifurcation syndrome
   Leriche's syndrome
I74.1 Embolism and thrombosis of other and unspecified parts of aorta
I74.2 Embolism and thrombosis of arteries of upper extremities
I74.3 Embolism and thrombosis of arteries of lower extremities
I74.4 Embolism and thrombosis of arteries of extremities, unspecified
     Includes:
    Peripheral arterial embolism
I74.5 Embolism and thrombosis of iliac artery
I74.8 Embolism and thrombosis of other arteries
I74.9 Embolism and thrombosis of unspecified artery
376
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
I77
Other disorders of arteries and arterioles
Excludes:
collagen (vascular) diseases (M30-M36)
hypersensitivity angiitis (M31.0)
pulmonary artery (I28.-)
I77.0 Arteriovenous fistula, acquired
     Includes:
    Aneurysmal varix
   Arteriovenous aneurysm, acquired
  Excludes:
 arteriovenous aneurysm NOS (Q27.3)
cerebral (I67.1)
coronary (I25.4)
traumatic - see injury of blood vessel by body region
I77.1 Stricture of artery
I77.2 Rupture of artery
     Includes:
    Fistula of artery
   Excludes:
  traumatic rupture of artery (see injury of blood vessel by body region)
I77.3 Arterial fibromuscular dysplasia
I77.4 Coeliac artery compression syndrome
I77.5 Necrosis of artery
I77.6 Arteritis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Aortitis NOS
   Endarteritis NOS
  Excludes:
 arteritis or endarteritis:
•
 aortic arch [Takayasu] (M31.4)
•
 cerebral NEC (I67.7)
•
 coronary (I25.8)
•
 deformans (I70.-)
•
 giant cell (M31.5-M31.6)
•
 obliterans (I70.-)
•
 senile (I70.-)
I77.8 
I77.9
Other specified disorders of arteries and arterioles
Includes:
Erosion
Ulcer
I77.9
of artery
Disorder of arteries and arterioles, unspecified
377
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I78
I78
Diseases of capillaries
I78.0 Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia
     Includes:
    Rendu-Osler-Weber disease
I78.1 Naevus, non-neoplastic
     Includes:
    Naevus:
   •
    araneus
   •
    spider
   •
    stellar
   Excludes:
  naevus:
 •
  NOS (D22.-)
 •
  blue (D22.-)
 •
  flammeus (Q82.5)
 •
  hairy (D22.-)
 •
  melanocytic (D22.-)
 •
  pigmented (D22.-)
 •
  portwine (Q82.5)
 •
  sanguineous (Q82.5)
 •
  strawberry (Q82.5)
 •
  vascular NOS (Q82.5)
 •
  verrucous (Q82.5)
I78.8 Other diseases of capillaries
I78.9 Disease of capillaries, unspecified
I79*
Disorders of arteries, arterioles and capillaries in diseases classified
elsewhere
I79.0* Aneurysm of aorta in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Syphilitic aneurysm of aorta (A52.0†)
I79.1* Aortitis in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Syphilitic aortitis (A52.0†)
I79.2* Peripheral angiopathy in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Diabetic peripheral angiopathy (E10-E14† with common fourth character .5)
I79.8* Other disorders of arteries, arterioles and capillaries in diseases classified elsewhere
378
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
Diseases of veins, lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes, not
elsewhere classified
(I80-I89)
I80
I82.8
Phlebitis and thrombophlebitis
Includes:
endophlebitis
inflammation, vein
periphlebitis
suppurative phlebitis
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
Excludes:
phlebitis and thrombophlebitis (of):
•
complicating:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07, O08.7)
•
pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O22.-, O87.-)
•
intracranial and intraspinal, septic or NOS (G08)
•
intracranial, nonpyogenic (I67.6)
•
intraspinal, nonpyogenic (G95.1)
•
portal (vein) (K75.1)
postphlebitic (postthrombotic) syndrome (I87.0-)
thrombophlebitis migrans (I82.1)
I80.0 Phlebitis and thrombophlebitis of superficial vessels of lower extremities
I80.1 Phlebitis and thrombophlebitis of femoral vein
I80.2 Phlebitis and thrombophlebitis of other deep vessels of lower extremities
     Includes:
    Deep vein thrombosis NOS
I80.3 Phlebitis and thrombophlebitis of lower extremities, unspecified
     Includes:
    Embolism or thrombosis of lower extremity NOS
I80.8 Phlebitis and thrombophlebitis of other sites
I80.9 Phlebitis and thrombophlebitis of unspecified site
I81
Portal vein thrombosis
Includes:
Excludes:
I82
portal (vein) obstruction
phlebitis of portal vein (K75.1)
Other venous embolism and thrombosis
Excludes:
venous embolism and thrombosis (of):
•
cerebral (I63.6) (I67.6)
•
complicating:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07) (O08.7)
•
pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O22.-) (O87.-)
•
coronary (I21-I25)
•
intracranial and intraspinal, septic or NOS (G08)
•
intracranial, nonpyogenic (I67.6)
•
intraspinal, nonpyogenic (G95.1)
•
lower extremities (I80.-)
•
mesenteric (K55.0)
•
portal (I81)
•
pulmonary (I26.-)
I82.0 Budd-Chiari syndrome
I82.1 Thrombophlebitis migrans
I82.2 Embolism and thrombosis of vena cava
I82.3 Embolism and thrombosis of renal vein
I82.8 Embolism and thrombosis of other specified veins
379
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I82.9
I82.9
I83
Embolism and thrombosis of unspecified vein
Includes:
Embolism of vein NOS
Thrombosis (vein) NOS
Varicose veins of lower extremities
Excludes:
complicating:
•
pregnancy (O22.0)
•
puerperium (O87.8)
I83.0 Varicose veins of lower extremities with ulcer
     Includes:
    Any condition in I83.9 with ulcer or specified as ulcerated
   Varicose ulcer (lower extremity, any part)
I83.1 Varicose veins of lower extremities with inflammation
     Includes:
    Any condition in I83.9 with inflammation or specified as inflamed
   Stasis dermatitis
I83.2 Varicose veins of lower extremities with both ulcer and inflammation
     Includes:
    Any condition in I83.9 with both ulcer and inflammation
I83.8o Varicose veins of lower extremities with other complications
      Includes:
     Varicose veins of lower extremities with:
    •
     edema
    •
     pain
    •
     swelling
I83.9 Varicose veins of lower extremities without ulcer, inflammation or other complication
     Includes:
    Asymptomatic varicose veins NOS
   Phlebectasia
  Varicose veins
 of lower extremity [any part] or of unspecified site
Varix
I84
Haemorrhoids
Includes:
Excludes:
piles
varicose veins of anus and rectum
complicating:
•
childbirth and the puerperium (O87.2)
•
pregnancy (O22.4)
I84.0 Internal thrombosed haemorrhoids
I84.1 Internal haemorrhoids with other complications
     Includes:
    Internal haemorrhoids:
   •
    bleeding
   •
    prolapsed
   •
    strangulated
   •
    ulcerated
I84.2 Internal haemorrhoids without complication
     Includes:
    Internal haemorrhoids NOS
I84.3 External thrombosed haemorrhoids
     Includes:
    Perianal haematoma (nontraumatic)
   Perianal thrombosis
I84.4 External haemorrhoids with other complications
     Includes:
    External haemorrhoids:
   •
    bleeding
   •
    prolapsed
   •
    strangulated
   •
    ulcerated
I84.5 External haemorrhoids without complication
     Includes:
    External haemorrhoids NOS
380
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
I84.6 Residual haemorrhoidal skin tags
     Includes:
    Skin tags of anus or rectum
I84.7 Unspecified thrombosed haemorrhoids
     Includes:
    Thrombosed haemorrhoids, unspecified whether internal or external
I84.8 Unspecified haemorrhoids with other complications
     Includes:
    Haemorrhoids, unspecified whether internal or external:
   •
    bleeding
   •
    prolapsed
   •
    strangulated
   •
    ulcerated
I84.9 Unspecified haemorrhoids without complication
     Includes:
    Haemorrhoids NOS
I85
I87.08o
Oesophageal varices
I85.0 Oesophageal varices with bleeding
I85.9 Oesophageal varices without bleeding
     Includes:
    Oesophageal varices NOS
I86
Varicose veins of other sites
Excludes:
retinal varices (H35.0)
varicose veins of unspecified site (I83.9)
I86.0 Sublingual varices
I86.1 Scrotal varices
     Includes:
    Varicocele
I86.2 Pelvic varices
I86.3 Vulval varices
     Excludes:
    complicating:
   •
    childbirth and the puerperium (O87.8-)
   •
    pregnancy (O22.1-)
I86.4 Gastric varices
I86.8 Varicose veins of other specified sites
     Includes:
    Varicose ulcer of nasal septum
I87
Other disorders of veins
I87.0 Postthrombotic syndrome
     Includes:
    Chronic venous hypertension
   Inflammation
  Postphlebitic syndrome
 Ulcer
I87.00o Postthrombotic syndrome with ulcer
I87.01o Postthrombotic syndrome with inflammation
I87.02o Postthrombotic syndrome with both ulcer and inflammation
I87.08o Postthrombotic syndrome with other complications
       Includes:
      Postphlebitic syndrome with:
     •
      edema
     •
      pain
     •
      swelling
     Excludes:
    Postphlebitic syndrome with :
   •
    both ulcer and inflammation (I87.02)
   •
    inflammation (I87.01)
   •
    ulcer (I87.00)
381
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I87.09o 
I87.09o
Postthrombotic syndrome without ulcer, inflammation or other complications
Includes:
Postphlebitic syndrome NOS
I87.1 Compression of vein
     Includes:
    Stricture of vein
   Vena cava syndrome (inferior)(superior)
  Excludes:
 pulmonary (I28.8)
I87.2 Venous insufficiency (chronic)(peripheral)
I87.8 Other specified disorders of veins
I87.9 Disorder of vein, unspecified
I88
Nonspecific lymphadenitis
Excludes:
acute lymphadenitis, except mesenteric (L04.-)
enlarged lymph nodes NOS (R59.-)
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease resulting in generalized lymphadenopathy (B24)
I88.0 Nonspecific mesenteric lymphadenitis
     Includes:
    Mesenteric lymphadenitis (acute)(chronic)
I88.1 Chronic lymphadenitis, except mesenteric
     Includes:
    Adenitis
   chronic, any lymph node except mesenteric
  Lymphadenitis
I88.8 Other nonspecific lymphadenitis
I88.9 Nonspecific lymphadenitis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Lymphadenitis NOS
I89
Other noninfective disorders of lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes
Excludes:
chylocele:
•
filarial (B74.-)
•
tunica vaginalis (nonfilarial) NOS (N50.8)
enlarged lymph nodes NOS (R59.-)
hereditary lymphoedema (Q82.0)
postmastectomy lymphoedema (I97.2)
I89.0 Lymphoedema, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Lymphangiectasis
I89.1 Lymphangitis
     Includes:
    Lymphangitis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    chronic
   •
    subacute
   Excludes:
  acute lymphangitis (L03.-)
I89.8 Other specified noninfective disorders of lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes
     Includes:
    Chylocele (nonfilarial)
   Lipomelanotic reticulosis
I89.9 Noninfective disorder of lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes, unspecified
     Includes:
    Disease of lymphatic vessels NOS
382
DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM (I00-I99)
Other and unspecified disorders of the circulatory system
(I95-I99)
I95
I97.9
Hypotension
Excludes:
cardiovascular collapse (R57.9)
maternal hypotension syndrome (O26.5)
nonspecific low blood pressure reading NOS (R03.1)
I95.0 Idiopathic hypotension
I95.1 Orthostatic hypotension
     Includes:
    Hypotension, postural
   Excludes:
  neurogenic orthostatic hypotension [Shy-Drager] (G90.3)
I95.2 Hypotension due to drugs
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
I95.8 Other hypotension
     Includes:
    Chronic hypotension
I95.9 Hypotension, unspecified
I97
Postprocedural disorders of circulatory system, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
postoperative shock (T81.1)
I97.0 Postcardiotomy syndrome
I97.1 Other functional disturbances following cardiac surgery
     Includes:
    Cardiac insufficiency
   following cardiac surgery or due to presence of cardiac prosthesis
  Heart failure
Use additional code to identify specific functional disturbance(s).
I97.2 Postmastectomy lymphoedema syndrome
     Includes:
    Elephantiasis
   Obliteration of lymphatic
  due to mastectomy
 vessels
I97.8 Other postprocedural disorders of circulatory system, not elsewhere classified
I97.9 Postprocedural disorder of circulatory system, unspecified
383
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
I98*
Other disorders of circulatory system in diseases classified elsewhere
Excludes:
I98*
disorders classified to other asterisk categories within this chapter
I98.0* Cardiovascular syphilis
      Includes:
     Cardiovascular syphilis:
    •
     NOS (A52.0†)
      •
       congenital, late (A50.5†)
I98.1* Cardiovascular disorders in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Cardiovascular:
    •
     involvement NEC, in Chagas' disease (chronic) (B57.2†)
      •
       lesions of pinta [carate] (A67.2†)
I98.2* Oesophageal varices without bleeding in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Oesophageal varices in:
    •
     liver disorders (K70-K71†)(K74.-†)
        •
         schistosomiasis (B65.-†)
I98.3* Oesophageal varices with bleeding in disease classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Oesophageal varices in:
    •
     liver disorders (K70-K71†) (K74.-†)
        •
         schistosomiasis (B65.-†)
I98.8* Other specified disorders of circulatory system in diseases classified elsewhere
I99
384
Other and unspecified disorders of circulatory system
I
CHAPTER X
Diseases of the respiratory system
(J00-J99)
Note:
Excludes:
When a respiratory condition is described as occurring in more than one site and is not specifically indexed, it
should be classified to the lower anatomic site (e.g., tracheobronchitis to bronchitis in J40).
certain:
•
conditions originating in the perinatal period (P00-P96)
•
infectious and parasitic diseases (A00-B99)
complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O00-O99)
congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (Q00-Q99)
endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (E00-E90)
injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98)
neoplasms (C00-D48)
symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified (R00-R99)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
J00-J06
J09-J18
J20-J22
J30-J39
J40-J47
J60-J70
J80-J84
J85-J86
J90-J94
J95-J99
Acute upper respiratory infections
Influenza and pneumonia
Other acute lower respiratory infections
Other diseases of upper respiratory tract
Chronic lower respiratory diseases
Lung diseases due to external agents
Other respiratory diseases principally affecting the interstitium
Suppurative and necrotic conditions of lower respiratory tract
Other diseases of pleura
Other diseases of the respiratory system
Asterisk categories for this chapter are provided as follows:
J17*
J91*
J99*
Pneumonia in diseases classified elsewhere
Pleural effusion in conditions classified elsewhere
Respiratory disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
385
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
J00
Acute upper respiratory infections
(J00-J06)
Excludes:
J00
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with acute exacerbation NOS (J44.1)
Acute nasopharyngitis [common cold]
Includes:
Excludes:
J01
coryza (acute)
nasal catarrh, acute
nasopharyngitis:
•
NOS
•
infective NOS
rhinitis acute
nasopharyngitis, chronic (J31.1)
pharyngitis:
•
NOS (J02.9)
•
acute (J02.-)
•
chronic (J31.2)
rhinitis:
•
NOS (J31.0)
•
allergic (J30.1-J30.4)
•
chronic (J31.0)
•
vasomotor (J30.0)
sore throat:
•
NOS (J02.9)
•
acute (J02.-)
•
chronic (J31.2)
Acute sinusitis
Includes:
abscess
empyema
infection
inflammation
suppuration
acute, of sinus (accessory)(nasal)
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Excludes:
sinusitis, chronic or NOS (J32.-)
J01.0 Acute maxillary sinusitis
     Includes:
    Acute antritis
J01.1 Acute frontal sinusitis
J01.2 Acute ethmoidal sinusitis
J01.3 Acute sphenoidal sinusitis
J01.4 Acute pansinusitis
J01.8 Other acute sinusitis
     Includes:
    Acute sinusitis involving more than one sinus but not pansinusitis
J01.9 Acute sinusitis, unspecified
J02
Acute pharyngitis
Includes:
Excludes:
386
acute sore throat
abscess:
•
peritonsillar (J36)
•
pharyngeal (J39.1)
•
retropharyngeal (J39.0)
acute laryngopharyngitis (J06.0)
chronic pharyngitis (J31.2)
DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM (J00-J99)
J02.0
Streptococcal pharyngitis
Includes:
Streptococcal sore throat
Excludes:
scarlet fever (A38)
J02.8 Acute pharyngitis due to other specified organisms
     Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
    Excludes:
   pharyngitis (due to):
  •
   enteroviral vesicular (B08.5)
  •
   herpesviral [herpes simplex] (B00.2)
  •
   infectious mononucleosis (B27.-)
  influenza virus:
 •
  identified (J09, J10.1)
 •
  not identified (J11.1)
J02.9 
J04.0
Acute pharyngitis, unspecified
Includes:
Pharyngitis (acute):
•
 NOS
•
 gangrenous
•
 infective NOS
•
 suppurative
•
 ulcerative
Sore throat (acute) NOS
J03
Acute tonsillitis
Excludes:
peritonsillar abscess (J36)
sore throat:
•
NOS (J02.9)
•
acute (J02.-)
•
streptococcal (J02.0)
J03.0 Streptococcal tonsillitis
J03.8 Acute tonsillitis due to other specified organisms
     Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
    Excludes:
   herpesviral [herpes simplex] pharyngotonsillitis (B00.2)
J03.9 Acute tonsillitis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Tonsillitis (acute):
   •
    NOS
   •
    follicular
   •
    gangrenous
   •
    infective
   •
    ulcerative
J04
Acute laryngitis and tracheitis
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Excludes:
acute obstructive laryngitis [croup] and epiglottitis (J05.-)
laryngismus (stridulus) (J38.5)
J04.0
Acute laryngitis
Includes:
Laryngitis (acute):
•
NOS
•
oedematous
•
subglottic
•
suppurative
•
ulcerative
Excludes:
chronic laryngitis (J37.0)
influenzal laryngitis, influenza virus:
•
identified (J09, J10.1)
•
not identified (J11.1)
387
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
J04.1 Acute tracheitis
     Includes:
    Tracheitis (acute):
   •
    NOS
   •
    catarrhal
   Excludes:
  chronic tracheitis (J42)
J04.2 Acute laryngotracheitis
     Includes:
    Laryngotracheitis NOS
   Tracheitis (acute) with laryngitis (acute)
  Excludes:
 chronic laryngotracheitis (J37.1)
J04.1
J05
Acute obstructive laryngitis [croup] and epiglottitis
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
J05.0 Acute obstructive laryngitis [croup]
     Includes:
    Obstructive laryngitis NOS
J05.1 Acute epiglottitis
     Includes:
    Epiglottitis NOS
J06
Acute upper respiratory infections of multiple and unspecified sites
Excludes:
acute respiratory infection NOS (J22)
influenza virus:
•
identified (J09, J10.1)
•
not identified (J11.1)
J06.0 Acute laryngopharyngitis
J06.8 Other acute upper respiratory infections of multiple sites
J06.9 Acute upper respiratory infection, unspecified
     Includes:
    Upper respiratory:
   •
    disease, acute
   •
    infection NOS
388
DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM (J00-J99)
Influenza and pneumonia
(J09-J18)
J09
Influenza due to identified Avian influenza virus
Includes:
J10
J11.8
Influenza caused by influenza viruses that normally infect only birds and, less commonly, other
animals
Influenza due to other identified influenza virus
Excludes:
Haemophilus influenzae [H. influenzae]:
•
infection NOS (A49.2)
•
meningitis (G00.0)
•
pneumonia (J14)
J10.0 Influenza with pneumonia, other influenza virus identified
     Includes:
    Influenzal (broncho)pneumonia, other influenza virus identified
J10.1 Influenza with other respiratory manifestations, other influenza virus identified
     Includes:
    Influenzal:
   •
    acute upper
   respiratory infection
  other influenza virus identified
 •
  laryngitis
 •
  pharyngitis
 •
  pleural effusion
 Influenza
J10.8 Influenza with other manifestations, other influenza virus identified
     Includes:
    Influenzal:
   •
    gastroenteritis
   •
    myocarditis (acute)
   other influenza virus identified
  Encephalopathy due to
 influenza
J11
Influenza, virus not identified
Includes:
Excludes:
influenza specific virus not stated to have been identified
viral influenza specific virus not stated to have been identified
Haemophilus influenzae [H. influenzae]:
•
infection NOS (A49.2)
•
meningitis (G00.0)
•
pneumonia (J14)
J11.0 Influenza with pneumonia, virus not identified
     Includes:
    Influenzal (broncho)pneumonia, unspecified or specific virus not identified
J11.1 Influenza with other respiratory manifestations, virus not identified
     Includes:
    Influenza NOS
   Influenzal:
  •
   acute upper
  respiratory infection
 unspecified or specific virus not identified
•
 laryngitis
•
 pharyngitis
•
 pleural effusion
J11.8 Influenza with other manifestations, virus not identified
     Includes:
    Influenzal:
   •
    gastroenteritis
   •
    myocarditis (acute)
   unspecified or specific virus not identified
  Encephalopathy due to
 influenza
389
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
J12
Viral pneumonia, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Excludes:
J12
bronchopneumonia due to viruses other than influenza viruses
congenital rubella pneumonitis (P35.0)
•
aspiration (due to)
•
pneumonia
•
NOS (J69.0)
•
anaesthesia during:
•
labour and delivery (O74.0-)
•
pregnancy (O29.0-)
•
puerperium (O89.0-)
•
congenital (P23.0)
•
in influenza (J09, J10.0,J11.0)
•
interstitial NOS (J84.9)
•
lipid (J69.1)
•
neonatal (P24.9)
•
severe acute respiratory syndrome [SARS] (U04.9-)
•
solids and liquids (J69.-)
J12.0 Adenoviral pneumonia
J12.1 Respiratory syncytial virus pneumonia
J12.2 Parainfluenza virus pneumonia
J12.3 Human metapneumovirus pneumonia
J12.8 Other viral pneumonia
J12.9 Viral pneumonia, unspecified
J13
Pneumonia due to Streptococcus pneumoniae
Includes:
Excludes:
J14
Pneumonia due to Haemophilus influenzae
Includes:
Excludes:
J15
bronchopneumonia due to S. pneumoniae
congenital pneumonia due to S. pneumoniae (P23.6)
pneumonia due to other streptococci (J15.3-J15.4)
bronchopneumonia due to H. influenzae
congenital pneumonia due to H. influenzae (P23.6)
Bacterial pneumonia, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Excludes:
bronchopneumonia due to bacteria other than S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae
chlamydial pneumonia (J16.0)
congenital pneumonia (P23.-)
Legionnaires' disease (A48.1)
J15.0 Pneumonia due to Klebsiella pneumoniae
J15.1 Pneumonia due to Pseudomonas
J15.2 Pneumonia due to Staphylococcus
J15.3 Pneumonia due to Streptococcus, group B
J15.4 Pneumonia due to other streptococci
     Excludes:
    pneumonia due to:
   •
    Streptococcus pneumoniae (J13)
   •
    streptococcus, group B (J15.3)
J15.5 Pneumonia due to Escherichia coli
J15.6 Pneumonia due to other aerobic Gram-negative bacteria
     Includes:
    Pneumonia due to Serratia marcescens
J15.7 Pneumonia due to Mycoplasma pneumoniae
J15.8 Other bacterial pneumonia
J15.9 Bacterial pneumonia, unspecified
390
DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM (J00-J99)
J16
Pneumonia due to other infectious organisms, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
ornithosis (A70)
pneumocystosis (B59)
pneumonia:
•
NOS (J18.9)
•
congenital (P23.-)
J16.0 Chlamydial pneumonia
J16.8 
J17.8*
Pneumonia due to other specified infectious organisms
J17*
Pneumonia in diseases classified elsewhere
J17.0* Pneumonia in bacterial diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Pneumonia (due to)(in):
    •
     actinomycosis (A42.0†)
      •
       anthrax (A22.1†)
        •
         gonorrhoea (A54.8†)
          •
           nocardiosis (A43.0†)
            •
             salmonella infection (A02.2†)
              •
               tularaemia (A21.2†)
                •
                 typhoid fever (A01.0†)
                  •
                   whooping cough (A37.-†)
J17.1* Pneumonia in viral diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Pneumonia in:
    •
     cytomegalovirus disease (B25.0†)
      •
       measles (B05.2†)
        •
         rubella (B06.8†)
          •
           varicella (B01.2†)
J17.2* Pneumonia in mycoses
      Includes:
     Pneumonia in:
    •
     aspergillosis (B44.0-B44.1†)
      •
       candidiasis (B37.1†)
        •
         coccidioidomycosis (B38.0-B38.2†)
          •
           histoplasmosis (B39.-†)
J17.3* Pneumonia in parasitic diseases
      Includes:
     Pneumonia in:
    •
     ascariasis (B77.8†)
      •
       schistosomiasis (B65.-†)
        •
         toxoplasmosis (B58.3†)
J17.8* Pneumonia in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Pneumonia (in):
    •
     ornithosis (A70†)
      •
       Q fever (A78†)
        •
         rheumatic fever (I00†)
          •
           spirochaetal, not elsewhere classified (A69.8†)
391
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
J18
Pneumonia, organism unspecified
Excludes:
J18
abscess of lung with pneumonia (J85.1)
drug-induced interstitial lung disorders (J70.2-J70.4)
pneumonia:
•
aspiration (due to):
•
NOS (J69.0)
•
anaesthesia during:
•
labour and delivery (O74.0-)
•
pregnancy (O29.0-)
•
puerperium (O89.0-)
•
neonatal (P24.9)
•
solids and liquids (J69.-)
•
congenital (P23.9)
•
interstitial NOS (J84.9)
•
lipid (J69.1)
•
usual interstitial (J84.1)
pneumonitis, due to external agents (J67-J70)
J18.0 Bronchopneumonia, unspecified
     Excludes:
    bronchiolitis (J21.-)
J18.1 Lobar pneumonia, unspecified
J18.2 Hypostatic pneumonia, unspecified
J18.8 Other pneumonia, organism unspecified
J18.9 Pneumonia, unspecified
392
DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM (J00-J99)
Other acute lower respiratory infections
(J20-J22)
Excludes:
J20
J22
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with acute:
•
exacerbation NOS (J44.1)
•
lower respiratory infection (J44.0)
Acute bronchitis
Includes:
Excludes:
bronchitis:
•
NOS, in those under l5 years of age
•
acute and subacute (with):
•
bronchospasm
•
fibrinous
•
membranous
•
purulent
•
septic
•
tracheitis
tracheobronchitis, acute
bronchitis:
•
NOS, in those 15 years of age and above (J40)
•
allergic NOS (J45.0-)
•
chronic:
•
NOS (J42)
•
mucopurulent (J41.1)
•
obstructive (J44.-)
•
simple (J41.0)
tracheobronchitis:
•
NOS (J40)
•
chronic (J42):
•
obstructive (J44.-)
J20.0 Acute bronchitis due to Mycoplasma pneumoniae
J20.1 Acute bronchitis due to Haemophilus influenzae
J20.2 Acute bronchitis due to streptococcus
J20.3 Acute bronchitis due to coxsackievirus
J20.4 Acute bronchitis due to parainfluenza virus
J20.5 Acute bronchitis due to respiratory syncytial virus
J20.6 Acute bronchitis due to rhinovirus
J20.7 Acute bronchitis due to echovirus
J20.8 Acute bronchitis due to other specified organisms
J20.80o Acute bronchitis due to human metapneumovirus
J20.88o Acute bronchitis due to other specified organisms
J20.9 Acute bronchitis, unspecified
J21
Acute bronchiolitis
Includes:
with bronchospasm
J21.0 Acute bronchiolitis due to respiratory syncytial virus
J21.1 Acute bronchiolitis due to human metapneumovirus
J21.8 Acute bronchiolitis due to other specified organisms
J21.9 Acute bronchiolitis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Bronchiolitis (acute)
J22
Unspecified acute lower respiratory infection
Includes:
Excludes:
Acute (lower) respiratory (tract) infection NOS
upper respiratory infection (acute) (J06.9)
393
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
J30
Other diseases of upper respiratory tract
(J30-J39)
J30
Vasomotor and allergic rhinitis
Includes:
Excludes:
spasmodic rhinorrhoea
allergic rhinitis with asthma (J45.0-)
rhinitis NOS (J31.0)
J30.0 Vasomotor rhinitis
J30.1 Allergic rhinitis due to pollen
     Includes:
    Allergy NOS due to pollen
   Hay fever
  Pollinosis
J30.2 Other seasonal allergic rhinitis
J30.3 Other allergic rhinitis
     Includes:
    Perennial allergic rhinitis
J30.4 Allergic rhinitis, unspecified
J31
Chronic rhinitis, nasopharyngitis and pharyngitis
J31.0 Chronic rhinitis
     Includes:
    Ozena
   Rhinitis (chronic):
  •
   NOS
  •
   atrophic
  •
   granulomatous
  •
   hypertrophic
  •
   obstructive
  •
   purulent
  •
   ulcerative
  Excludes:
 rhinitis:
•
 allergic (J30.1-J30.4)
•
 vasomotor (J30.0)
J31.1 Chronic nasopharyngitis
     Excludes:
    nasopharyngitis, acute or NOS (J00)
J31.2 Chronic pharyngitis
     Includes:
    Chronic sore throat
   Pharyngitis (chronic):
  •
   atrophic
  •
   granular
  •
   hypertrophic
  Excludes:
 pharyngitis, acute or NOS (J02.9)
J32
Chronic sinusitis
Includes:
abscess
empyema
infection
suppuration
(chronic) of sinus (accessory)(nasal)
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Excludes:
acute sinusitis (J01.-)
J32.0
394
Chronic maxillary sinusitis
Includes:
Antritis (chronic)
Maxillary sinusitis NOS
DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM (J00-J99)
J32.1 Chronic frontal sinusitis
     Includes:
    Frontal sinusitis NOS
J32.2 Chronic ethmoidal sinusitis
     Includes:
    Ethmoidal sinusitis NOS
J32.3 Chronic sphenoidal sinusitis
     Includes:
    Sphenoidal sinusitis NOS
J32.4 Chronic pansinusitis
     Includes:
    Pansinusitis NOS
J32.8 Other chronic sinusitis
     Includes:
    Sinusitis (chronic) involving more than one sinus but not pansinusitis
J32.9 Chronic sinusitis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Sinusitis (chronic) NOS
J33
J34.88o
Nasal polyp
Excludes:
adenomatous polyps (D14.0)
J33.0 Polyp of nasal cavity
     Includes:
    Polyp:
   •
    choanal
   •
    nasopharyngeal
J33.1 Polypoid sinus degeneration
     Includes:
    Woakes' syndrome or ethmoiditis
J33.8 Other polyp of sinus
     Includes:
    Polyp of sinus:
   •
    accessory
   •
    ethmoidal
   •
    maxillary
   •
    sphenoidal
J33.9 Nasal polyp, unspecified
J34
Other disorders of nose and nasal sinuses
Excludes:
varicose ulcer of nasal septum (I86.8)
J34.0 Abscess, furuncle and carbuncle of nose
     Includes:
    Cellulitis
   Necrosis
  of nose (septum)
 Ulceration
J34.1 Cyst and mucocele of nose and nasal sinus
J34.2 Deviated nasal septum
     Includes:
    Deflection or deviation of septum (nasal)(acquired)
J34.3 Hypertrophy of nasal turbinates
J34.8 Other specified disorders of nose and nasal sinuses
J34.80o Mucositis (ulcerative) of nose and nasal sinuses
       Includes:
      Drug-induced mucositis
     Radiation induced mucositis
    Use additional code to identify any agranulocytosis (neutropenia) (D70.0)
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX), to identify external agent
J34.88o Other specified disorders of nose and nasal sinuses
       Includes:
      Perforation of nasal septum NOS
     Rhinolith
395
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
J35
J35
Chronic diseases of tonsils and adenoids
J35.0 Chronic tonsillitis
     Excludes:
    tonsillitis:
   •
    NOS (J03.9)
   •
    acute (J03.-)
J35.1 Hypertrophy of tonsils
     Includes:
    Enlargement of tonsils
J35.2 Hypertrophy of adenoids
     Includes:
    Enlargement of adenoids
J35.3 Hypertrophy of tonsils with hypertrophy of adenoids
J35.8 Other chronic diseases of tonsils and adenoids
     Includes:
    Adenoid vegetations
   Amygdalolith
  Cicatrix of tonsil (and adenoid)
 Tonsillar tag
Ulcer of tonsil
J35.9 Chronic disease of tonsils and adenoids, unspecified
     Includes:
    Disease (chronic) of tonsils and adenoids NOS
J36
Peritonsillar abscess
Includes:
abscess of tonsil
peritonsillar cellulitis
quinsy
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Excludes:
retropharyngeal abscess (J39.0)
tonsillitis:
•
NOS (J03.9)
•
acute (J03.-)
•
chronic (J35.0)
J37
Chronic laryngitis and laryngotracheitis
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
J37.0 Chronic laryngitis
     Includes:
    Laryngitis:
   •
    catarrhal
   •
    hypertrophic
   •
    sicca
   Excludes:
  laryngitis:
 •
  NOS (J04.0)
 •
  acute (J04.0)
 •
  obstructive (acute) (J05.0)
J37.1 Chronic laryngotracheitis
     Includes:
    Laryngitis, chronic, with tracheitis (chronic)
   Tracheitis, chronic, with laryngitis
  Excludes:
 laryngotracheitis:
•
 NOS (J04.2)
•
 acute (J04.2)
tracheitis:
•
 NOS (J04.1)
•
 acute (J04.1)
•
 chronic (J42)
396
DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM (J00-J99)
J38
Diseases of vocal cords and larynx, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
laryngitis:
•
obstructive (acute) (J05.0)
•
ulcerative (J04.0)
postoperative subglottic stenosis(J95.5)
stridor:
•
NOS (R06.1)
•
congenital laryngeal (P28.8)
J38.0 Paralysis of vocal cords and larynx
     Includes:
    Laryngoplegia
   Paralysis of glottis
J38.01o Paralysis of vocal cords and larynx, unilateral
J38.02o Paralysis of vocal cords and larynx, bilateral
J38.09o Paralysis of vocal cords and larynx, unspecified whether unilateral or bilateral
J38.1 Polyp of vocal cord and larynx
     Excludes:
    adenomatous polyps (D14.1)
J38.2 Nodules of vocal cords
     Includes:
    Chorditis (fibrinous)(nodosa)(tuberosa)
   Singer's nodes
  Teacher's nodes
J38.3 Other diseases of vocal cords
     Includes:
    Abscess
   Cellulitis
  Granuloma
 Leukokeratosis
Leukoplakia
J38.7
of vocal cord(s)
J38.4 Oedema of larynx
     Includes:
    Oedema (of):
   •
    glottis
   •
    subglottic
   •
    supraglottic
   Excludes:
  laryngitis:
 •
  acute obstructive [croup] (J05.0)
 •
  oedematous (J04.0)
J38.5 Laryngeal spasm
     Includes:
    Laryngismus (stridulus)
J38.6 Stenosis of larynx
J38.7 Other diseases of larynx
     Includes:
    Abscess
   Cellulitis
  Disease NOS
 Necrosis
Pachyderma
Perichondritis
Ulcer
of larynx
397
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
J39
Other diseases of upper respiratory tract
Excludes:
J39
acute respiratory infection:
•
NOS (J22):
•
upper (J06.9)
upper respiratory inflammation due to chemicals, gases, fumes or vapours (J68.2)
J39.0 Retropharyngeal and parapharyngeal abscess
     Includes:
    Peripharyngeal abscess
   Excludes:
  peritonsillar abscess (J36)
J39.1 Other abscess of pharynx
     Includes:
    Cellulitis of pharynx
   Nasopharyngeal abscess
J39.2 Other diseases of pharynx
     Includes:
    Cyst
   Oedema
Excludes:
of pharynx or nasopharynx
pharyngitis:
•
chronic (J31.2)
•
ulcerative (J02.9)
J39.3 Upper respiratory tract hypersensitivity reaction, site unspecified
J39.8 Other specified diseases of upper respiratory tract
J39.9 Disease of upper respiratory tract, unspecified
398
DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM (J00-J99)
Chronic lower respiratory diseases
(J40-J47)
Excludes:
J40
cystic fibrosis (E84.-)
Bronchitis, not specified as acute or chronic
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
J41
J43.2
Bronchitis not specified as acute or chronic in those under 15 years of age can be assumed to be
of acute nature and should be classified to J20.-.
bronchitis:
•
NOS
•
catarrhal
•
with tracheitis NOS
tracheobronchitis NOS
bronchitis:
•
allergic NOS (J45.0-)
•
asthmatic NOS (J45.9-)
•
chemical (acute) (J68.0)
Simple and mucopurulent chronic bronchitis
Excludes:
chronic bronchitis:
•
NOS (J42)
•
obstructive (J44.-)
J41.0 Simple chronic bronchitis
J41.1 Mucopurulent chronic bronchitis
J41.8 Mixed simple and mucopurulent chronic bronchitis
J42
Unspecified chronic bronchitis
Includes:
Excludes:
J43
chronic:
•
bronchitis NOS
•
tracheitis
•
tracheobronchitis
chronic:
•
asthmatic bronchitis (J44.-)
•
bronchitis:
•
simple and mucopurulent (J41.-)
•
with airways obstruction (J44.-)
•
emphysematous bronchitis (J44.-)
•
obstructive pulmonary disease NOS (J44.9)
Emphysema
Excludes:
emphysema:
•
compensatory (J98.3)
•
due to inhalation of chemicals, gases, fumes or vapours (J68.4)
•
interstitial (J98.2):
•
neonatal (P25.0)
•
mediastinal (J98.2)
•
surgical (subcutaneous) (T81.81)
•
traumatic subcutaneous (T79.7)
•
with chronic (obstructive) bronchitis (J44.-)
emphysematous (obstructive) bronchitis (J44.-)
J43.0 MacLeod's syndrome
     Includes:
    Unilateral:
   •
    emphysema
   •
    transparency of lung
J43.1 Panlobular emphysema
     Includes:
    Panacinar emphysema
J43.2 Centrilobular emphysema
399
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
J43.8 
J43.8
Other emphysema
J43.9 Emphysema, unspecified
     Includes:
    Emphysema (lung)(pulmonary):
   •
    NOS
   •
    bullous
   •
    vesicular
   Emphysematous bleb
J44
Other chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Includes:
Excludes:
chronic:
•
bronchitis:
•
asthmatic (obstructive)
•
emphysematous
•
with:
•
airways obstruction
•
emphysema
•
obstructive:
•
asthma
•
bronchitis
•
tracheobronchitis
COPD
asthma (J45.-)
asthmatic bronchitis NOS (J45.9-)
bronchiectasis (J47)
chronic:
•
bronchitis:
•
NOS (J42)
•
simple and mucopurulent (J41.-)
•
tracheitis (J42)
•
tracheobronchitis (J42)
emphysema (J43.-)
lung diseases due to external agents (J60-J70)
J44.0 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with acute lower respiratory infection
     Use additional code to identify
    •
     acute bronchiolitis (J21.-)
    •
     acute bronchitis (J20.-)
    •
     pneumonia (any form in J10.0,J11.0,J12.-,J13,J14,J15.-,J16.-,J18.-)
J44.1 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with acute exacerbation, unspecified
J44.8 Other specified chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
     Includes:
    Chronic bronchitis:
   •
    asthmatic (obstructive) NOS
   •
    emphysematous NOS
   •
    obstructive NOS
   Excludes:
  with acute exacerbation (J44.1)
 with acute lower respiratory infection (J44.0)
J44.9 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Chronic obstructive:
   •
    airway disease NOS
   •
    lung disease NOS (COPD)
J45
Asthma
Excludes:
400
chronic:
•
asthmatic (obstructive) bronchitis (J44.-)
•
obstructive asthma (J44.-)
eosinophilic asthma (J82)
lung diseases due to external agents (J60-J70)
DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM (J00-J99)
J45.0
Predominantly allergic asthma
Includes:
Allergic:
•
bronchitis NOS
•
rhinitis with asthma
Atopic asthma
Extrinsic allergic asthma
Hay fever with asthma
J45.00o Predominantly allergic asthma without stated status asthmaticus
J45.01o Predominantly allergic asthma with stated status asthmaticus
J45.1 Nonallergic asthma
     Includes:
    Idiosyncratic asthma
   Intrinsic nonallergic asthma
J45.10o Nonallergic asthma without stated status asthmaticus
J45.11o Nonallergic asthma with stated status asthmaticus
J45.8 Mixed asthma
     Includes:
    Combination of conditions listed in (J45.0-J45.1)
J45.80o Mixed asthma without stated status asthmaticus
J45.81o Mixed asthma with stated status asthmaticus
J45.9 Asthma, unspecified
     Includes:
    Asthmatic bronchitis NOS
   Late-onset asthma
J45.90o Asthma, unspecified, without stated status asthmaticus
J45.91o 
J47
Asthma, unspecified, with stated status asthmaticus
Includes:
Acute severe asthma NOS
Status asthmaticus NOS
J47
Bronchiectasis
Includes:
Excludes:
bronchiolectasis
congenital bronchiectasis (Q33.4)
tuberculous bronchiectasis (current disease) (A15-A16)
401
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
J60
Lung diseases due to external agents
(J60-J70)
Excludes:
J60
asthma classified to J45.-
Coalworker's pneumoconiosis
Includes:
Excludes:
J61
Pneumoconiosis due to asbestos and other mineral fibres
Includes:
Excludes:
J62
anthracosilicosis
anthracosis
coalworker's lung
with tuberculosis in A15-A16 (J65)
asbestosis
pleural plaque with asbestosis (J92.0)
with tuberculosis in A15-A16(J65)
Pneumoconiosis due to dust containing silica
Includes:
Excludes:
silicotic fibrosis (massive) of lung
pneumoconiosis with tuberculosis in A15-A16 (J65)
J62.0 Pneumoconiosis due to talc dust
J62.8 Pneumoconiosis due to other dust containing silica
     Includes:
    Silicosis NOS
J63
Pneumoconiosis due to other inorganic dusts
Excludes:
with tuberculosis in A15-A16 (J65)
J63.0 Aluminosis (of lung)
J63.1 Bauxite fibrosis (of lung)
J63.2 Berylliosis
J63.3 Graphite fibrosis (of lung)
J63.4 Siderosis
J63.5 Stannosis
J63.8 Pneumoconiosis due to other specified inorganic dusts
J64
Unspecified pneumoconiosis
Excludes:
J65
Pneumoconiosis associated with tuberculosis
Includes:
J66
with tuberculosis in A15-A16 (J65)
Any condition in (J60-J64) with tuberculosis, any type in (A15)
Airway disease due to specific organic dust
Excludes:
bagassosis (J67.1)
farmer's lung (J67.0)
hypersensitivity pneumonitis due to organic dust (J67.-)
reactive airways dysfunction syndrome (J68.3)
J66.0 Byssinosis
     Includes:
    Airway disease due to cotton dust
J66.1 Flax-dresser's disease
J66.2 Cannabinosis
J66.8 Airway disease due to other specific organic dusts
402
DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM (J00-J99)
J67
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis due to organic dust
Includes:
Excludes:
allergic alveolitis and pneumonitis due to inhaled organic dust and particles of fungal,
actinomycetic or other origin
pneumonitis due to inhalation of chemicals, gases, fumes or vapours (J68.0)
J67.0 Farmer's lung
     Includes:
    Harvester's lung
   Haymaker's lung
  Mouldy hay disease
J67.1 Bagassosis
     Includes:
    Bagasse:
   •
    disease
   •
    pneumonitis
J67.2 Bird fancier's lung
     Includes:
    Budgerigar fancier's disease or lung
   Pigeon fancier's disease or lung
J67.3 Suberosis
     Includes:
J68.3
Corkhandler's disease or lung
Corkworker's disease or lung
J67.4 Maltworker's lung
     Includes:
    Alveolitis due to Aspergillus clavatus
J67.5 Mushroom-worker's lung
J67.6 Maple-bark-stripper's lung
     Includes:
    Alveolitis due to Cryptostroma corticale
   Cryptostromosis
J67.7 Air-conditioner and humidifier lung
     Includes:
    Allergic alveolitis due to fungi, thermophilic actinomycetes and other organisms growing in
   ventilation [air-conditioning] systems
J67.8 Hypersensitivity pneumonitis due to other organic dusts
     Includes:
    Cheese-washer's lung
   Coffee-worker's lung
  Fishmeal-worker's lung
 Furrier's lung
Sequoiosis
J67.9 Hypersensitivity pneumonitis due to unspecified organic dust
     Includes:
    Allergic alveolitis (extrinsic) NOS
   Hypersensitivity pneumonitis NOS
J67.90o Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
J67.99o Hypersensitivity pneumonitis due to unspecified organic dust
J68
Respiratory conditions due to inhalation of chemicals, gases, fumes and
vapours
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
J68.0 Bronchitis and pneumonitis due to chemicals, gases, fumes and vapours
     Includes:
    Chemical bronchitis (acute)
J68.1 Pulmonary oedema due to chemicals, gases, fumes and vapours
     Includes:
    Chemical pulmonary oedema (acute)
J68.2 Upper respiratory inflammation due to chemicals, gases, fumes and vapours, not elsewhere
     classified
J68.3 Other acute and subacute respiratory conditions due to chemicals, gases, fumes and vapours
     Includes:
    Reactive airways dysfunction syndrome
403
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
J68.4 Chronic respiratory conditions due to chemicals, gases, fumes and vapours
     Includes:
    Emphysema (diffuse)(chronic)
   Obliterative bronchiolitis
  due to inhalation of chemicals, gases fumes and vapours
 (chronic)(subacute)
Pulmonary fibrosis (chronic)
J68.8 Other respiratory conditions due to chemicals, gases, fumes and vapours
J68.9 Unspecified respiratory condition due to chemicals, gases, fumes and vapours
J68.4
J69
Pneumonitis due to solids and liquids
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
Excludes:
neonatal aspiration syndromes (P24.-)
J69.0 Pneumonitis due to food and vomit
     Includes:
    Aspiration pneumonia (due to):
   •
    NOS
   •
    food (regurgitated)
   •
    gastric secretions
   •
    milk
   •
    vomit
   Excludes:
  Mendelson's syndrome ( J95.4)
J69.1 Pneumonitis due to oils and essences
     Includes:
    Lipid pneumonia
J69.8 Pneumonitis due to other solids and liquids
     Includes:
    Pneumonitis due to aspiration of blood
J70
Respiratory conditions due to other external agents
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
J70.0 Acute pulmonary manifestations due to radiation
     Includes:
    Radiation pneumonitis
J70.1 Chronic and other pulmonary manifestations due to radiation
     Includes:
    Fibrosis of lung following radiation
J70.2 Acute drug-induced interstitial lung disorders
J70.3 Chronic drug-induced interstitial lung disorders
J70.4 Drug-induced interstitial lung disorders, unspecified
J70.8 Respiratory conditions due to other specified external agents
J70.9 Respiratory conditions due to unspecified external agent
404
DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM (J00-J99)
Other respiratory diseases principally affecting the interstitium
(J80-J84)
J80
Adult respiratory distress syndrome
Includes:
J81
Excludes:
acute oedema of lung
pulmonary congestion (passive)
hypostatic pneumonia (J18.2)
pulmonary oedema:
•
chemical (acute) (J68.1)
•
due to external agents (J60-J70)
•
with mention of heart disease NOS or heart failure (I50.1)
Pulmonary eosinophilia, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Excludes:
J84
acute respiratory distress syndrome
adult hyaline membrane disease
Pulmonary oedema
Includes:
J82
J84.9
Eosinophilic asthma
Löffler's pneumonia
Tropical (pulmonary) eosinophilia NOS
due to:
•
aspergillosis (B44.-)
•
drugs (J70.2-J70.4)
•
specified parasitic infection (B50-B83)
•
systemic connective tissue disorders (M30-M36)
Other interstitial pulmonary diseases
Excludes:
drug-induced interstitial lung disorders (J70.2-J70.4)
interstitial emphysema (J98.2)
lung diseases due to external agents (J60-J70)
lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis resulting from human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease
(B24)
J84.0 Alveolar and parietoalveolar conditions
     Includes:
    Alveolar proteinosis
   Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis
J84.1 Other interstitial pulmonary diseases with fibrosis
     Includes:
    Diffuse pulmonary fibrosis
   Fibrosing alveolitis (cryptogenic)
  Hamman-Rich syndrome
 Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Usual interstitial pneumonia
Excludes:
pulmonary fibrosis (chronic):
•
 due to inhalation of chemicals, gases, fumes or vapours (J68.4)
•
 following radiation (J70.1)
J84.8 Other specified interstitial pulmonary diseases
J84.9 Interstitial pulmonary disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Interstitial pneumonia NOS
405
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
J85
Suppurative and necrotic conditions of lower respiratory tract
(J85-J86)
J85
Abscess of lung and mediastinum
J85.0 Gangrene and necrosis of lung
J85.1 Abscess of lung with pneumonia
     Excludes:
    with pneumonia due to specified organism (J09-J16)
J85.2 Abscess of lung without pneumonia
     Includes:
    Abscess of lung NOS
J85.3 Abscess of mediastinum
J86
Pyothorax
Includes:
abscess of:
•
pleura
•
thorax
empyema
pyopneumothorax
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Excludes:
due to tuberculosis (A15)
J86.0 Pyothorax with fistula
J86.9 Pyothorax without fistula
406
DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM (J00-J99)
Other diseases of pleura
(J90-J94)
J90
J94.9
Pleural effusion, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Excludes:
pleurisy with effusion
chylous (pleural) effusion (J94.0)
pleurisy NOS (R09.1)
tuberculous (A15)
J91* Pleural effusion in conditions classified elsewhere
J92 Pleural plaque
Includes:
pleural thickening
J92.0 Pleural plaque with presence of asbestos
J92.9 Pleural plaque without asbestos
     Includes:
    Pleural plaque NOS
J93
Pneumothorax
Excludes:
pneumothorax:
•
congenital or perinatal (P25.1)
•
traumatic (S27.0)
•
tuberculous (current disease) (A15)
pyopneumothorax (J86.-)
J93.0 Spontaneous tension pneumothorax
J93.1 Other spontaneous pneumothorax
J93.8 Other pneumothorax
J93.9 Pneumothorax, unspecified
J94
Other pleural conditions
Excludes:
pleurisy NOS (R09.1)
traumatic:
•
haemopneumothorax (S27.2)
•
haemothorax (S27.1)
tuberculous pleural conditions (current disease) (A15)
J94.0 Chylous effusion
     Includes:
    Chyliform effusion
J94.1 Fibrothorax
J94.2 Haemothorax
     Includes:
    Haemopneumothorax
J94.8 Other specified pleural conditions
     Includes:
    Hydrothorax
J94.9 Pleural condition, unspecified
407
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
J95
Other diseases of the respiratory system
(J95-J99)
J95
Postprocedural respiratory disorders, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
emphysema (subcutaneous) resulting from a procedure (T81.81)
pulmonary manifestations due to radiation (J70.0-J70.1)
J95.0 Tracheostomy malfunction
J95.00o Haemorrhage from tracheostomy stoma
       Excludes:
      haemorrhage complicating the procedure (T81.0)
J95.01o Infection of tracheostomy stoma
       Includes:
      Sepsis of tracheostomy stoma
     Excludes:
    site of current (healing) surgical wound (T81.4)
J95.02o Malfunction of tracheostomy stoma
       Includes:
      Obstruction of tracheostomy airway
J95.03o Tracheo-esophageal fistula following tracheostomy
J95.08o Other tracheostomy complication
J95.1 Acute pulmonary insufficiency following thoracic surgery
J95.2 Acute pulmonary insufficiency following nonthoracic surgery
J95.3 Chronic pulmonary insufficiency following surgery
J95.4 Mendelson's syndrome
     Includes:
    Chemical pneumonitis due to anaesthesia
   Excludes:
  complicating:
 •
  labour and delivery (O74.0)
 •
  pregnancy (O29.0)
 •
  puerperium (O89.0)
J95.5 Postprocedural subglottic stenosis
J95.8 Other postprocedural respiratory disorders
J95.80o Postprocedural pneumothorax
J95.81o Transfusion related acute lung injury (TRALI)
J95.88o Other postprocedural respiratory disorders
       Includes:
      Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP)
     Use additional code to identify the specific type of pneumonia.
J95.9 Postprocedural respiratory disorder, unspecified
J96
Respiratory failure, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
cardiorespiratory failure (R09.2)
postprocedural respiratory failure (J95.-)
respiratory:
•
arrest (R09.2)
•
distress:
•
in newborn (P22.0)
•
syndrome of adult (J80)
J96.0 Acute respiratory failure
J96.1 Chronic respiratory failure
J96.9 Respiratory failure, unspecified
408
DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM (J00-J99)
J98
Other respiratory disorders
Excludes:
J98.0
apnoea:
•
NOS (R06.8)
•
newborn (P28.4)
•
sleep (G47.3-):
•
newborn (P28.3)
J98.9
Diseases of bronchus, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Broncholithiasis
Bronchospasm NOS
Calcification
Stenosis
of bronchus
Ulcer
Tracheobronchial:
•
collapse
•
dyskinesia
J98.1 Pulmonary collapse
     Excludes:
    atelectasis (of):
   •
    newborn (P28.0-P28.1)
   •
    tuberculous (current disease) (A15-A16)
J98.10o Atelectasis
J98.18o Other pulmonary collapse
       Includes:
      Collapse of lung
J98.2 Interstitial emphysema
     Includes:
    Mediastinal emphysema
   Excludes:
  emphysema:
 •
  NOS (J43.9)
 •
  in fetus and newborn (P25.0)
 •
  surgical (subcutaneous) (T81.8)
 •
  traumatic subcutaneous (T79.7)
J98.3 Compensatory emphysema
J98.4 Other disorders of lung
     Includes:
    Calcification of lung
   Cystic lung disease (acquired)
  Lung disease NOS
 Pulmolithiasis
J98.5 Diseases of mediastinum, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Fibrosis
   Hernia
  of mediastinum
 Retraction
Excludes:
J98.6
Mediastinitis
abscess of mediastinum (J85.3)
Disorders of diaphragm
Includes:
Diaphragmatitis
Paralysis
Relaxation
Excludes:
of diaphragm
congenital malformation of diaphragm NEC (Q79.1)
diaphragmatic hernia (K44.-):
•
congenital (Q79.0)
J98.8 Other specified respiratory disorders
J98.9 Respiratory disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Respiratory disease (chronic) NOS
409
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
J99*
J99*
Respiratory disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
J99.0* Rheumatoid lung disease (M05.1†)
J99.1* Respiratory disorders in other diffuse connective tissue disorders
      Includes:
     Respiratory disorders in:
    •
     dermatomyositis (M33.0-M33.1†)
      •
       polymyositis (M33.2†)
        •
         sicca syndrome [Sjögren] (M35.0†)
           •
            systemic:
           •
            lupus erythematosus (M32.1†)
             •
              sclerosis (M34.8†)
               •
                Wegener's granulomatosis (M31.3†)
J99.8* Respiratory disorders in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Respiratory disorders in:
    •
     amoebiasis (A06.5†)
      •
       ankylosing spondylitis (M45†)
        •
         cryoglobulinaemia (D89.1†)
          •
           sporotrichosis (B42.0†)
            •
             syphilis (A52.7†)
410
I
CHAPTER XI
Diseases of the digestive system
(K00-K93)
Excludes:
certain:
•
conditions originating in the perinatal period (P00-P96)
•
infectious and parasitic diseases (A00-B99)
complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O00-O99)
congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (Q00-Q99)
endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (E00-E90)
injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98)
neoplasms (C00-D48)
symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified (R00-R99)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
K00-K14
K20-K31
K35-K38
K40-K46
K50-K52
K55-K63
K65-K67
K70-K77
K80-K87
K90-K93
Diseases of oral cavity, salivary glands and jaws
Diseases of oesophagus, stomach and duodenum
Diseases of appendix
Hernia
Noninfective enteritis and colitis
Other diseases of intestines
Diseases of peritoneum
Diseases of liver
Disorders of gallbladder, biliary tract and pancreas
Other diseases of the digestive system
Asterisk categories for this chapter are provided as follows:
K23*
K67*
K77*
K87*
K93*
Disorders of oesophagus in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of peritoneum in infectious diseases classified elsewhere
Liver disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of gallbladder, biliary tract and pancreas in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of other digestive organs in diseases classified elsewhere
411
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K00
Diseases of oral cavity, salivary glands and jaws
(K00-K14)
K00
Disorders of tooth development and eruption
Excludes:
K00.0
Anodontia
Includes:
embedded and impacted teeth (K01.-)
Hypodontia
Oligodontia
K00.1 Supernumerary teeth
     Includes:
    Distomolar
   Fourth molar
  Mesiodens
 Paramolar
Supplementary teeth
K00.2 Abnormalities of size and form of teeth
     Includes:
    Concrescence
   Fusion
  of teeth
 Gemination
Dens:
•
 evaginatus
•
 in dente
•
 invaginatus
Enamel pearls
Macrodontia
Microdontia
Peg-shaped [conical] teeth
Taurodontism
Tuberculum paramolare
Excludes:
tuberculum Carabelli, which is regarded as a normal variation and should not be coded
K00.3 Mottled teeth
     Includes:
    Dental fluorosis
   Mottling of enamel
  Nonfluoride enamel opacities
 Excludes:
deposits [accretions] on teeth (K03.6)
K00.4 Disturbances in tooth formation
     Includes:
    Aplasia and hypoplasia of cementum
   Dilaceration of tooth
  Enamel hypoplasia (neonatal)(postnatal)(prenatal)
 Regional odontodysplasia
Turner's tooth
Excludes:
Hutchinson's teeth and mulberry molars in congenital syphilis (A50.5)
mottled teeth (K00.3)
K00.5 Hereditary disturbances in tooth structure, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Amelogenesis imperfecta
   Dentinal dysplasia
  Dentinogenesis imperfecta
 Odontogenesis imperfecta
Shell teeth
412
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K00.6
Disturbances in tooth eruption
Includes:
Dentia praecox
Natal tooth
Neonatal tooth
Premature:
•
eruption of tooth
•
shedding of primary [deciduous] tooth
Retained [persistent] primary tooth
K00.7 Teething syndrome
K00.8 Other disorders of tooth development
     Includes:
    Colour changes during tooth formation
   Intrinsic staining of teeth NOS
K00.9 
K03.0
Disorder of tooth development, unspecified
Includes:
Disorder of odontogenesis NOS
K01
Embedded and impacted teeth
Excludes:
embedded and impacted teeth with abnormal position of such teeth or adjacent teeth (K07.3)
K01.0 Embedded teeth
     Includes:
    An embedded tooth is a tooth that has failed to erupt without obstruction by another tooth.
K01.1 Impacted teeth
     Includes:
    An impacted tooth is a tooth that has failed to erupt because of obstruction by another tooth.
K02
Dental caries
K02.0 Caries limited to enamel
     Includes:
    White spot lesions [initial caries]
K02.1 Caries of dentine
K02.2 Caries of cementum
K02.3 Arrested dental caries
K02.4 Odontoclasia
     Includes:
    Infantile melanodontia
   Melanodontoclasia
K02.8 Other dental caries
K02.9 Dental caries, unspecified
K03
Other diseases of hard tissues of teeth
Excludes:
K03.0
bruxism (F45.8)
dental caries (K02.-)
teeth-grinding NOS (F45.8)
Excessive attrition of teeth
Includes:
Wear
•
approximal
•
occlusal
of teeth
413
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K03.1
K03.1
Abrasion of teeth
Includes:
Abrasion:
•
dentifrice
•
habitual
•
occupational
•
ritual
•
traditional
Wedge defect NOS
of teeth
K03.2 Erosion of teeth
     Includes:
    Erosion of teeth:
   •
    NOS
   •
    due to:
   •
    diet
   •
    drugs and medicaments
   •
    persistent vomiting
   •
    idiopathic
   •
    occupational
K03.3 Pathological resorption of teeth
     Includes:
    Internal granuloma of pulp
   Resorption of teeth (external)
K03.4 Hypercementosis
     Includes:
    Cementation hyperplasia
K03.5 Ankylosis of teeth
K03.6 Deposits [accretions] on teeth
     Includes:
    Dental calculus:
   •
    subgingival
   •
    supragingival
   Deposits [accretions] on teeth:
  •
   betel
  •
   black
  •
   green
  •
   materia alba
  •
   orange
  •
   tobacco
  Staining of teeth:
 •
  NOS
 •
  extrinsic NOS
K03.7 Posteruptive colour changes of dental hard tissues
     Excludes:
    deposits [accretions] on teeth (K03.6)
K03.8 Other specified diseases of hard tissues of teeth
     Includes:
    Irradiated enamel
   Sensitive dentine
  Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify radiation, if radiation-induced.
K03.9 Disease of hard tissues of teeth, unspecified
414
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K04
K04.0
Diseases of pulp and periapical tissues
Pulpitis
Includes:
K05.1
Pulpal:
•
abscess
•
polyp
Pulpitis:
•
acute
•
chronic (hyperplastic)(ulcerative)
•
suppurative
K04.1 Necrosis of pulp
     Includes:
    Pulpal gangrene
K04.2 Pulp degeneration
     Includes:
    Denticles
   Pulpal:
  •
   calcifications
  •
   stones
K04.3 Abnormal hard tissue formation in pulp
     Includes:
    Secondary or irregular dentine
K04.4 Acute apical periodontitis of pulpal origin
     Includes:
    Acute apical periodontitis NOS
K04.5 Chronic apical periodontitis
     Includes:
    Apical:
   •
    or periapical granuloma
   •
    periodontitis NOS
K04.6 Periapical abscess with sinus
     Includes:
    Dental
   Dentoalveolar
K04.7
Periapical abscess without sinus
Includes:
Dental
Dentoalveolar
Periapical
abscess with sinus
abscess NOS
K04.8 Radicular cyst
     Includes:
    Cyst:
   •
    apical (periodontal)
   •
    periapical
   •
    residual radicular
   Excludes:
  lateral periodontal cyst (K09.0)
K04.9 Other and unspecified diseases of pulp and periapical tissues
K05
Gingivitis and periodontal diseases
K05.0 Acute gingivitis
     Excludes:
    acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis (A69.1)
   herpesviral [herpes simplex] gingivostomatitis (B00.2)
K05.1 Chronic gingivitis
     Includes:
    Gingivitis (chronic):
   •
    NOS
   •
    desquamative
   •
    hyperplastic
   •
    simple marginal
   •
    ulcerative
415
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K05.2 Acute periodontitis
     Includes:
    Acute pericoronitis
   Parodontal abscess
  Periodontal abscess
 Excludes:
acute apical periodontitis (K04.4)
periapical abscess (K04.7):
•
 with sinus (K04.6)
periodontitis (periodontal abscess) (parodontal abscess) in diabetes mellitus (E10.62) (E11.62)
(E13.62) (E14.62)
K05.3 Chronic periodontitis
     Includes:
    Chronic pericoronitis
   Periodontitis:
  •
   NOS
  •
   complex
  •
   simplex
K05.4 Periodontosis
     Includes:
    Juvenile periodontosis
K05.5 Other periodontal diseases
K05.6 Periodontal disease, unspecified
K05.2
K06
Other disorders of gingiva and edentulous alveolar ridge
Excludes:
atrophy of edentulous alveolar ridge (K08.2)
gingivitis:
•
NOS (K05.1)
•
acute (K05.0)
•
chronic (K05.1)
K06.0 Gingival recession
     Includes:
    Gingival recession (generalized)(localized)(postinfective)(post-operative)
K06.1 Gingival enlargement
     Includes:
    Gingival fibromatosis
K06.2 Gingival and edentulous alveolar ridge lesions associated with trauma
     Includes:
    Irritative hyperplasia of edentulous ridge [denture hyperplasia]
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
K06.8 Other specified disorders of gingiva and edentulous alveolar ridge
     Includes:
    Fibrous epulis
   Flabby ridge
  Giant cell epulis
 Peripheral giant cell granuloma
Pyogenic granuloma of gingiva
K06.9 Disorder of gingiva and edentulous alveolar ridge, unspecified
K07
Dentofacial anomalies [including malocclusion]
Excludes:
hemifacial atrophy or hypertrophy (Q67.4)
unilateral condylar hyperplasia or hypoplasia (K10.8)
K07.0 Major anomalies of jaw size
     Excludes:
    acromegaly (E22.0)
   hemifacial atrophy or hypertrophy (Q67.4)
  Robin's syndrome (Q87.0)
 unilateral condylar hyperplasia or hypoplasia (K10.8)
K07.00o Maxillary hyperplasia
       Includes:
      Maxillary macrognathism
K07.01o Mandibular hyperplasia
       Includes:
      Mandibular macrognathism
416
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K07.02o
Maxillary and mandibular macrogenia
Includes:
Macrognathism:
•
mandibular
•
maxillary
K07.5
K07.03o Maxillary hypoplasia
       Includes:
      Maxillary micrognathism
K07.04o Mandibular hypoplasia
       Includes:
      Mandibular micrognathism
K07.05o Maxillary and mandibular microgenia
       Includes:
      Micrognathism:
     •
      mandibular
     •
      maxillary
K07.08o Other specified anomalies of jaw size
K07.09o Anomaly of jaw size, unspecified
K07.1 Anomalies of jaw-cranial base relationship
K07.11o Mandibular prognathism
K07.12o Maxillary prognathism
K07.13o Mandibular retrognathism
K07.14o Maxillary retrognathism
K07.18o Other specified anomalies (or asymmetry) of jaw-cranial base relationship
K07.19o Anomaly of jaw-cranial base relationship, unspecified
K07.2 Anomalies of dental arch relationship
     Includes:
    Crossbite (anterior)(posterior)
   Disto-occlusion
  Mesio-occlusion
 Midline deviation of dental arch
Openbite (anterior)(posterior)
Overbite (excessive):
•
 deep
•
 horizontal
•
 vertical
Overjet
Posterior lingual occlusion of mandibular teeth
K07.3 Anomalies of tooth position
     Includes:
    Crowding
   Diastema
  Displacement
 Rotation
Spacing, abnormal
Transposition
Excludes:
of tooth or teeth
Impacted or embedded teeth with abnormal position of such teeth or adjacent teeth
embedded and impacted teeth without abnormal position (K01.-)
K07.4 Malocclusion, unspecified
K07.5 Dentofacial functional abnormalities
     Includes:
    Abnormal jaw closure
   Malocclusion due to:
  •
   abnormal swallowing
  •
   mouth breathing
  •
   tongue, lip or finger habits
  Excludes:
 bruxism (F45.8)
teeth-grinding NOS (F45.8)
417
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K07.6 Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) disorders
     Excludes:
    current temporomandibular joint:
   •
    dislocation (S03.0)
   •
    strain (S03.4)
K07.60o Recurrent dislocation of the temporomandibular joint
       Excludes:
      Current (acute) dislocation of TMJ (S03.0)
K07.61o Articular disc disorder of the temporomandibular joint
       Includes:
      (Acute) closed lock
     Anterior displacement
    Clicking (snapping)
   of TMJ
  Degenerative joint disease
 Discitis
Internal derangement
K07.62o Extracapsular disorder of the temporomandibular joint
       Includes:
      Myalgia
     Myofacial pain dysfunction [MPD]
    Myositis
   of TMJ
  Myospasm
 Occlusal dysfunction
Trismus
K07.6
Excludes:
Temporomandibular joint pain syndrome (K07.63)
K07.63o Arthralgia of temporomandibular joint
       Includes:
      Costen's complex or syndrome
     Temporomandibular joint pain-dysfunction syndrome
K07.64o Ankylosis of temporomandibular joint
       Includes:
      Adhesions of TMJ
K07.68o Other disorders of temporomandibular joint
       Includes:
Arthritis (arthrosis)
Osteoarthritis
Osteophyte
of TMJ
K07.69o Temporomandibular joint disorder, unspecified
       Includes:
      Temporomandibular joint pain NOS
K07.8 Other dentofacial anomalies
K07.9 Dentofacial anomaly, unspecified
K08
Other disorders of teeth and supporting structures
K08.0 Exfoliation of teeth due to systemic causes
K08.1 Loss of teeth due to accident, extraction or local periodontal disease
K08.2 Atrophy of edentulous alveolar ridge
K08.3 Retained dental root
K08.8 Other specified disorders of teeth and supporting structures
     Includes:
    Enlargement of alveolar ridge NOS
   Irregular alveolar process
K08.80o Maxillary alveolar ridge hyperplasia
K08.81o Mandibular alveolar ridge hyperplasia
K08.82o Maxillary alveolar ridge hypoplasia
418
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K08.83o Mandibular alveolar ridge hypoplasia
K08.87o Toothache NOS
K08.88o Other specified disorders of teeth and supporting structures
K08.9 Disorder of teeth and supporting structures, unspecified
K09
K10.1
Cysts of oral region, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Excludes:
lesions showing histological features both of aneurysmal cyst and of another fibro-osseous
lesion
radicular cyst (K04.8)
K09.0 Developmental odontogenic cysts
     Includes:
    Cyst:
   •
    dentigerous
   •
    eruption
   •
    follicular
   •
    gingival
   •
    lateral periodontal
   •
    primordial
   Keratocyst
K09.1 Developmental (nonodontogenic) cysts of oral region
     Includes:
    Cyst (of):
   •
    globulomaxillary
   •
    incisive canal
   •
    median palatal
   •
    nasopalatine
   •
    palatine papilla
K09.2 Other cysts of jaw
     Includes:
    Cyst of jaw:
   •
    NOS
   •
    aneurysmal
   •
    haemorrhagic
   •
    traumatic
   Excludes:
  latent bone cyst of jaw (K10.0)
 Stafne's cyst (K10.0)
K09.8 Other cysts of oral region, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Dermoid
   Epidermoid
  cyst of mouth
 Lymphoepithelial
Epstein's pearl
Nasoalveolar cyst
Nasolabial cyst
K09.9 Cyst of oral region, unspecified
K10
Other diseases of jaws
K10.0 Developmental disorders of jaws
     Includes:
    Latent bone cyst of jaw
   Stafne's cyst
  Torus:
 •
  mandibularis
 •
  palatinus
K10.1 Giant cell granuloma, central
     Includes:
    Giant cell granuloma NOS
   Excludes:
  peripheral giant cell granuloma (K06.8)
419
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K10.2
K10.2
Inflammatory conditions of jaws
Includes:
Osteitis
Osteomyelitis (neonatal)
Osteoradionecrosis
Periostitis
of jaw (acute)(chronic) (suppurative)
Sequestrum of jaw bone
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify radiation, if radiation-induced.
K10.3 Alveolitis of jaws
     Includes:
    Alveolar osteitis
   Dry socket
K10.8 Other specified diseases of jaws
     Includes:
    Cherubism
   Exostosis
  Fibrous dysplasia
of jaw
Unilateral condylar:
•
hyperplasia
•
hypoplasia
K10.9
K11
Disease of jaws, unspecified
Diseases of salivary glands
K11.0 Atrophy of salivary gland
K11.1 Hypertrophy of salivary gland
K11.2 Sialoadenitis
     Excludes:
    epidemic parotitis (B26.-)
   uveoparotid fever [Heerfordt] (D86.8)
K11.3 Abscess of salivary gland
K11.4 Fistula of salivary gland
     Excludes:
    congenital fistula of salivary gland (Q38.4)
K11.5 Sialolithiasis
     Includes:
    Calculus
   Stone
K11.6
Mucocele of salivary gland
Includes:
Mucous:
•
extravasation cyst
•
retention cyst
Ranula
K11.7
420
Disturbances of salivary secretion
Includes:
Hypoptyalism
Ptyalism
Xerostomia
Excludes:
dry mouth NOS (R68.2)
of salivary gland or duct
of salivary gland
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K11.8
Other diseases of salivary glands
Includes:
Benign lymphoepithelial lesion of salivary gland
Mikulicz' disease
Necrotizing sialometaplasia
Sialectasia
Stenosis
of salivary duct
Stricture
Excludes:
K11.9
K12
K12.3
sicca syndrome [Sjögren] (M35.0)
Disease of salivary gland, unspecified
Includes:
Sialoadenopathy NOS
Stomatitis and related lesions
Excludes:
cancrum oris (A69.0)
cheilitis (K13.0)
gangrenous stomatitis (A69.0)
herpesviral [herpes simplex] gingivostomatitis (B00.2)
noma (A69.0)
K12.0 Recurrent oral aphthae
     Includes:
    Aphthous stomatitis (major)(minor)
   Bednar's aphthae
  Periadenitis mucosa necrotica recurrens
 Recurrent aphthous ulcer
Stomatitis herpetiformis
K12.1 Other forms of stomatitis
     Includes:
    Stomatitis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    denture
   •
    ulcerative
   •
    vesicular
K12.2 Cellulitis and abscess of mouth
     Includes:
    Cellulitis of mouth (floor)
   Submandibular abscess
  Excludes:
 abscess (of):
•
 periapical (K04.6-K04.7)
•
 periodontal (K05.2)
•
 peritonsillar (J36)
•
 salivary gland (K11.3)
•
 tongue (K14.0)
K12.3 Oral mucositis (ulcerative)
     Includes:
    Mucositis (oral) (oropharyngeal):
   •
    NOS
   •
    drug-induced
   •
    radiation induced
   •
    viral
   Use additional code to identify any agranulocytosis (neutropenia) (D70.0)
  Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify external agent
 Excludes:
mucositis (ulcerative) of:
•
 gastrointestinal tract (except oral cavity and oropharynx) (K92.80)
•
 nose and nasal sinuses (J34.80)
•
 vagina and vulva (N76.80)
421
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K13
Other diseases of lip and oral mucosa
Includes:
Excludes:
K13
epithelial disturbances of tongue
certain disorders of gingiva and edentulous alveolar ridge (K05-K06)
cysts of oral region (K09.-)
diseases of tongue (K14.-)
stomatitis and related lesions (K12.-)
K13.0 Diseases of lips
     Includes:
    cheilitis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    angular
   •
    exfoliative
   •
    glandular
   cheilodynia
  cheilosis
 mucocele of lip
perlèche NEC
Excludes:
ariboflavinosis (E53.0)
cheilitis due to radiation-related disorders (L55-L59)
perlèche due to:
•
 candidiasis (B37.8)
•
 riboflavin deficiency (E53.0)
K13.1 Cheek and lip biting
K13.2 Leukoplakia and other disturbances of oral epithelium, including tongue
     Includes:
    Erythroplakia
   of oral epithelium, including tongue
  Leukoedema
Excludes:
Leukokeratosis nicotina palati
Smoker's palate
hairy leukoplakia (K13.3)
K13.3 Hairy leukoplakia
K13.4 Granuloma and granuloma-like lesions of oral mucosa
     Includes:
    Eosinophilic granuloma
   Granuloma pyogenicum
  of oral mucosa
 Verrucous xanthoma
K13.5 Oral submucous fibrosis
     Includes:
    Submucous fibrosis of tongue
K13.6 Irritative hyperplasia of oral mucosa
     Excludes:
    irritative hyperplasia of edentulous ridge [denture hyperplasia] (K06.2)
K13.7 Other and unspecified lesions of oral mucosa
     Includes:
    Focal oral mucinosis
K14
Diseases of tongue
Excludes:
erythroplakia
focal epithelial
hyperplasia
of tongue (K13.2)
leukoedema
leukoplakia
hairy leukoplakia (K13.3)
macroglossia (congenital) (Q38.2)
submucous fibrosis of tongue (K13.5)
422
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K14.0
Glossitis
Includes:
Abscess
Ulceration (traumatic)
Excludes:
K14.9
of tongue
Moeller's glossitis
atrophic glossitis (K14.4)
K14.1 Geographic tongue
     Includes:
    Benign migratory glossitis
   Glossitis areata exfoliativa
K14.2 Median rhomboid glossitis
K14.3 Hypertrophy of tongue papillae
     Includes:
    Black hairy tongue
   Coated tongue
  Hypertrophy of foliate papillae
 Lingua villosa nigra
K14.4 Atrophy of tongue papillae
     Includes:
    Atrophic glossitis
K14.5 Plicated tongue
     Includes:
    Fissured tongue
   Furrowed tongue
  Scrotal tongue
 Excludes:
fissured tongue, congenital (Q38.3)
K14.6 Glossodynia
     Includes:
    Glossopyrosis
   Painful tongue
K14.8 Other diseases of tongue
     Includes:
    Atrophy
   Crenated
  Enlargement
 Hypertrophy
K14.9
(of) tongue
Disease of tongue, unspecified
Includes:
Glossopathy NOS
423
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K20
Diseases of oesophagus, stomach and duodenum
(K20-K31)
Excludes:
K20
hiatus hernia (K44.-)
Oesophagitis
Includes:
Abscess of oesophagus
Oesophagitis:
•
NOS
•
chemical
•
peptic
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
Excludes:
erosion of oesophagus (K22.1-)
reflux oesophagitis (K21.0)
ulcerative oesophagitis(K22.1-)
with gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (K21.0)
K21
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
Excludes:
gastro-oesophageal reflux in the newborn (infant) (P78.81)
K21.0 Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease with oesophagitis
     Includes:
    Reflux oesophagitis
K21.9 Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease without oesophagitis
     Includes:
    Oesophageal reflux NOS
K22
Other diseases of oesophagus
Excludes:
oesophageal varices (I85.-)
K22.0 Achalasia of cardia
     Includes:
    Achalasia NOS
   Cardiospasm
  Excludes:
 congenital cardiospasm (Q39.5)
K22.1 Ulcer of oesophagus
     Includes:
    Barrett's ulcer
   Erosion of oesophagus
  Ulcer of oesophagus:
 •
  NOS
 •
  due to ingestion of:
 •
  chemicals
 •
  drugs and medicaments
 •
  fungal
 •
  peptic
 Ulcerative oesophagitis
Use additional code to identify any associated gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (K21.0)
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
Excludes:
Barrett's oesophagus (K22.7)
K22.10o Ulcer of oesophagus, acute with haemorrhage
K22.11o Ulcer of oesophagus, acute with perforation
K22.12o Ulcer of oesophagus, acute with both haemorrhage and perforation
K22.13o Ulcer of oesophagus, acute without haemorrhage or perforation
K22.14o Ulcer of oesophagus, chronic or unspecified with haemorrhage
K22.15o Ulcer of oesophagus, chronic or unspecified with perforation
K22.16o Ulcer of oesophagus, chronic or unspecified with both haemorrhage and perforation
K22.17o Ulcer of oesophagus, chronic without haemorrhage or perforation
K22.19o Ulcer of oesophagus, unspecified as acute or chronic, without haemorrhage or perforation
424
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K22.2
Oesophageal obstruction
Includes:
Compression
Constriction
Stenosis
Stricture
Excludes:
K25.7
of oesophagus
congenital stenosis or stricture of oesophagus (Q39.3)
K22.3 Perforation of oesophagus
     Includes:
    Rupture of oesophagus
   Excludes:
  traumatic perforation of (thoracic) oesophagus (S27.8)
K22.4 Dyskinesia of oesophagus
     Includes:
    Corkscrew oesophagus
   Diffuse oesophageal spasm
  Spasm of oesophagus
 Excludes:
cardiospasm (K22.0)
K22.5 Diverticulum of oesophagus, acquired
     Includes:
    Oesophageal pouch, acquired
   Excludes:
  diverticulum of oesophagus (congenital) (Q39.6)
K22.6 Gastro-oesophageal laceration-haemorrhage syndrome
     Includes:
    Mallory-Weiss syndrome
K22.7 Barrett's esophagus
     Includes:
    Barrett's:
   •
    disease
   •
    syndrome
   Excludes:
  Barrett's ulcer (K22.1-)
K22.8 Other specified diseases of oesophagus
     Includes:
    Haemorrhage of oesophagus NOS
K22.9 Disease of oesophagus, unspecified
K23*
Disorders of oesophagus in diseases classified elsewhere
K23.0* Tuberculous oesophagitis (A18.8†)
K23.1* Megaoesophagus in Chagas' disease (B57.3†)
K23.8* Disorders of oesophagus in other diseases classified elsewhere
K25
Gastric ulcer
Includes:
erosion (acute) of stomach
ulcer (peptic):
•
pylorus
•
stomach
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
Excludes:
acute haemorrhagic erosive gastritis (K29.0)
peptic ulcer NOS (K27.-)
K25.0 Gastric ulcer, acute with haemorrhage
K25.1 Gastric ulcer, acute with perforation
K25.2 Gastric ulcer, acute with both haemorrhage and perforation
K25.3 Gastric ulcer, acute without haemorrhage or perforation
K25.4 Gastric ulcer, chronic or unspecified with haemorrhage
K25.5 Gastric ulcer, chronic or unspecified with perforation
K25.6 Gastric ulcer, chronic or unspecified with both haemorrhage and perforation
K25.7 Gastric ulcer, chronic without haemorrhage or perforation
425
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K25.9
K25.9
K26
Gastric ulcer, unspecified as acute or chronic, without haemorrhage or perforation
Duodenal ulcer
Includes:
erosion (acute) of duodenum
ulcer (peptic):
•
duodenal
•
postpyloric
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
Excludes:
peptic ulcer NOS (K27.-)
K26.0 Duodenal ulcer, acute with haemorrhage
K26.1 Duodenal ulcer, acute with perforation
K26.2 Duodenal ulcer, acute with both haemorrhage and perforation
K26.3 Duodenal ulcer, acute without haemorrhage or perforation
K26.4 Duodenal ulcer, chronic or unspecified with haemorrhage
K26.5 Duodenal ulcer, chronic or unspecified with perforation
K26.6 Duodenal ulcer, chronic or unspecified with both haemorrhage and perforation
K26.7 Duodenal ulcer, chronic without haemorrhage or perforation
K26.9 Duodenal ulcer, unspecified as acute or chronic, without haemorrhage or perforation
K27
Peptic ulcer, site unspecified
Includes:
gastroduodenal
peptic
Excludes:
ulcer NOS
peptic ulcer of newborn (P78.88)
K27.0 Peptic ulcer, acute with haemorrhage
K27.1 Peptic ulcer, acute with perforation
K27.2 Peptic ulcer, acute with both haemorrhage and perforation
K27.3 Peptic ulcer, acute without haemorrhage or perforation
K27.4 Peptic ulcer, chronic or unspecified with haemorrhage
K27.5 Peptic ulcer, chronic or unspecified with perforation
K27.6 Peptic ulcer, chronic or unspecified with both haemorrhage and perforation
K27.7 Peptic ulcer, chronic without haemorrhage or perforation
K27.9 Peptic ulcer, unspecified as acute or chronic, without haemorrhage or perforation
K28
Gastrojejunal ulcer
Includes:
Excludes:
ulcer (peptic) or erosion:
•
anastomotic
•
gastrocolic
•
gastrointestinal
•
gastrojejunal
•
jejunal
•
marginal
•
stomal
primary ulcer of small intestine (K63.3)
K28.0 Gastrojejunal ulcer, acute with haemorrhage
K28.1 Gastrojejunal ulcer, acute with perforation
K28.2 Gastrojejunal ulcer, acute with both haemorrhage and perforation
K28.3 Gastrojejunal ulcer, acute without haemorrhage or perforation
K28.4 Gastrojejunal ulcer, chronic or unspecified with haemorrhage
K28.5 Gastrojejunal ulcer, chronic or unspecified with perforation
426
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K28.6 Gastrojejunal ulcer, chronic or unspecified with both haemorrhage and perforation
K28.7 Gastrojejunal ulcer, chronic without haemorrhage or perforation
K28.9 Gastrojejunal ulcer, unspecified as acute or chronic, without haemorrhage or perforation
K29
K31.2
Gastritis and duodenitis
Use additional
•
code to identify Helicobacter Pylori (B96.80) if present.
•
external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify if drug induced.
Excludes:
eosinophilic gastritis or gastroenteritis (K52.8)
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (E16.4)
K29.0 Acute haemorrhagic gastritis
     Includes:
    Acute (erosive) gastritis with haemorrhage
   Excludes:
  erosion (acute) of stomach (K25.-)
K29.1 Other acute gastritis
K29.2 Alcoholic gastritis
K29.3 Chronic superficial gastritis
K29.4 Chronic atrophic gastritis
     Includes:
    Gastric atrophy
K29.5 Chronic gastritis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Chronic gastritis:
   •
    antral
   •
    fundal
K29.6 Other gastritis
     Includes:
    Giant hypertrophic gastritis
   Granulomatous gastritis
  Ménétrier's disease
K29.7 Gastritis, unspecified
K29.8 Duodenitis
K29.9 Gastroduodenitis, unspecified
K30
Dyspepsia
Includes:
Excludes:
K31
Acid pepsin disorder
Indigestion
dyspepsia:
•
nervous (F45.3)
•
neurotic (F45.3)
•
psychogenic (F45.3)
heartburn (R12)
Other diseases of stomach and duodenum
Includes:
Excludes:
functional disorders of stomach
diverticulum of duodenum (K57.0-K57.1)
gastrointestinal haemorrhage (K92.0-K92.2)
K31.0 Acute dilatation of stomach
     Includes:
    Acute distension of stomach
K31.1 Adult hypertrophic pyloric stenosis
     Includes:
    Gastric outlet obstruction or syndrome
   Pyloric stenosis NOS
  Excludes:
 congenital or infantile pyloric stenosis (Q40.0)
K31.2 Hourglass stricture and stenosis of stomach
     Excludes:
    congenital hourglass stomach (Q40.2)
   hourglass contraction of stomach (K31.88)
427
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K31.3 Pylorospasm, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    pylorospasm:
   •
    congenital or infantile with pyloric stenosis (Q40.0)
   •
    neurotic (F45.3)
   •
    psychogenic (F45.3)
K31.4 Gastric diverticulum
     Excludes:
    congenital diverticulum of stomach (Q40.2)
K31.5 Obstruction of duodenum
     Includes:
    Constriction
   Stenosis
  of duodenum
 Stricture
Duodenal ileus (chronic)
Excludes:
congenital stenosis of duodenum (Q41.0)
K31.6 Fistula of stomach and duodenum
     Includes:
    Gastrocolic fistula
   Gastrojejunocolic fistula
K31.7 Polyp of stomach and duodenum
     Excludes:
    adenomatous polyp of stomach (D13.1)
K31.8 Other specified diseases of stomach and duodenum
     Excludes:
    Dieulafoy's ulcer of stomach (K25.0)
K31.80o Angiodysplasia of stomach and duodenum with bleeding
K31.81o Angiodysplasia of stomach and duodenum without bleeding
K31.88o Other specified diseases of stomach and duodenum
       Includes:
      Achlorhydria
     Dieulafoy's lesion of stomach and duodenum with bleeding
    Gastroptosis
   Hourglass contraction of stomach
K31.9 Disease of stomach and duodenum, unspecified
K31.3
428
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
Diseases of appendix
(K35-K38)
K35
K38.9
Acute appendicitis
K35.2 Acute appendicitis with generalized peritonitis
     Includes:
    Appendicitis (acute) with generalized (diffuse) peritonitis following rupture or perforation
K35.3 Acute appendicitis with localized peritonitis
     Includes:
    Acute appendicitis with localized peritonitis with or without rupture or perforation
   Acute appendicitis with peritoneal abscess
K35.8 Acute appendicitis, other and unspecified
     Includes:
    Acute appendicitis without mention of localized or generalized peritonitis
K36
Other appendicitis
Includes:
Appendicitis:
•
chronic
•
recurrent
K37 Unspecified appendicitis
K38 Other diseases of appendix
K38.0 Hyperplasia of appendix
K38.1 Appendicular concretions
     Includes:
    Faecalith
   Stercolith
K38.2 Diverticulum of appendix
K38.3 Fistula of appendix
K38.8 Other specified diseases of appendix
     Includes:
    Intussusception of appendix
K38.9 
of appendix
Disease of appendix, unspecified
429
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K40
Hernia
(K40-K46)
Note:
Includes:
K40
Hernia with both gangrene and obstruction is classified to hernia with gangrene.
hernia:
•
acquired
•
congenital [except diaphragmatic or hiatus]
•
recurrent
Inguinal hernia
Includes:
bubonocele
inguinal hernia:
•
NOS
•
direct
•
double
•
indirect
•
oblique
scrotal hernia
K40.0 Bilateral inguinal hernia, with obstruction, without gangrene
K40.1 Bilateral inguinal hernia, with gangrene
K40.2 Bilateral inguinal hernia, without obstruction or gangrene
     Includes:
    Bilateral inguinal hernia NOS
K40.3 Unilateral or unspecified inguinal hernia, with obstruction, without gangrene
     Includes:
    Inguinal hernia (unilateral):
•
•
•
•
causing obstruction
incarcerated
irreducible
strangulated
without gangrene
K40.4 Unilateral or unspecified inguinal hernia, with gangrene
     Includes:
    Inguinal hernia NOS with gangrene
K40.9 Unilateral or unspecified inguinal hernia, without obstruction or gangrene
     Includes:
    Inguinal hernia (unilateral) NOS
K41
Femoral hernia
K41.0 Bilateral femoral hernia, with obstruction, without gangrene
K41.1 Bilateral femoral hernia, with gangrene
K41.2 Bilateral femoral hernia, without obstruction or gangrene
     Includes:
    Bilateral femoral hernia NOS
K41.3 Unilateral or unspecified femoral hernia, with obstruction, without gangrene
     Includes:
    Femoral hernia (unilateral):
•
•
•
•
causing obstruction
incarcerated
irreducible
strangulated
without gangrene
K41.4 Unilateral or unspecified femoral hernia, with gangrene
K41.9 Unilateral or unspecified femoral hernia, without obstruction or gangrene
     Includes:
    Femoral hernia (unilateral) NOS
430
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K42
Umbilical hernia
Includes:
Excludes:
K42.0
paraumbilical hernia
omphalocele (Q79.2)
K44.9
Umbilical hernia with obstruction, without gangrene
Includes:
Umbilical hernia:
•
•
•
•
causing obstruction
incarcerated
irreducible
strangulated
without gangrene
K42.1 Umbilical hernia with gangrene
     Includes:
    Gangrenous umbilical hernia
K42.9 Umbilical hernia without obstruction or gangrene
     Includes:
    Umbilical hernia NOS
K43
Ventral hernia
Includes:
K43.0
hernia:
•
epigastric
•
incisional
Ventral hernia with obstruction, without gangrene
Includes:
Ventral hernia:
•
•
•
•
causing obstruction
incarcerated
irreducible
strangulated
without gangrene
K43.1 Ventral hernia with gangrene
     Includes:
    Gangrenous ventral hernia
K43.9 Ventral hernia without obstruction or gangrene
     Includes:
    Ventral hernia NOS
K44
Diaphragmatic hernia
Includes:
Excludes:
hiatus hernia (oesophageal)(sliding)
paraoesophageal hernia
congenital hernia:
•
diaphragmatic (Q79.0)
•
hiatus (Q40.1)
K44.0 Diaphragmatic hernia with obstruction, without gangrene
     Includes:
    Diaphragmatic hernia
   •
    causing obstruction
   •
    incarcerated
   without gangrene
  •
   irreducible
  •
   strangulated
K44.1 Diaphragmatic hernia with gangrene
     Includes:
    Gangrenous diaphragmatic hernia
K44.9 Diaphragmatic hernia without obstruction or gangrene
     Includes:
    Diaphragmatic hernia NOS
431
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K45
Other abdominal hernia
Includes:
K45
hernia:
•
abdominal, specified site NEC
•
lumbar
•
obturator
•
pudendal
•
retroperitoneal
•
sciatic
K45.0 Other specified abdominal hernia with obstruction, without gangrene
     Includes:
    Any condition listed under K45:
   •
    causing obstruction
   •
    incarcerated
   without gangrene
  •
   irreducible
  •
   strangulated
K45.1 Other specified abdominal hernia with gangrene
     Includes:
    Any condition listed under K45 specified as gangrenous
K45.8 Other specified abdominal hernia without obstruction or gangrene
K46
Unspecified abdominal hernia
Includes:
Excludes:
enterocele
epiplocele
hernia:
•
NOS
•
interstitial
•
intestinal
•
intra-abdominal
vaginal enterocele (N81.5)
K46.0 Unspecified abdominal hernia with obstruction, without gangrene
     Includes:
    Any condition listed under K46:
   •
    causing obstruction
   without gangrene
  •
   incarcerated
  •
   irreducible
  •
   strangulated
K46.1 Unspecified abdominal hernia with gangrene
     Includes:
    Any condition listed under K46 specified as gangrenous
K46.9 Unspecified abdominal hernia without obstruction or gangrene
     Includes:
    Abdominal hernia NOS
432
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
Noninfective enteritis and colitis
(K50-K52)
Includes:
Excludes:
K50
K52.3
noninfective inflammatory bowel disease
irritable bowel syndrome (K58.-)
megacolon (K59.3)
Crohn's disease [regional enteritis]
Includes:
Excludes:
granulomatous enteritis
ulcerative colitis (K51.-)
K50.0 Crohn's disease of small intestine
     Includes:
    Crohn's disease [regional enteritis] of:
   •
    duodenum
   •
    ileum
   •
    jejunum
   Ileitis:
  •
   regional
  •
   terminal
  Excludes:
 with Crohn's disease of large intestine (K50.8)
K50.1 Crohn's disease of large intestine
     Includes:
    Colitis:
   •
    granulomatous
   •
    regional
   Crohn's disease [regional enteritis] of:
  •
   colon
  •
   large bowel
  •
   rectum
  Excludes:
 with Crohn's disease of small intestine (K50.8)
K50.8 Other Crohn's disease
     Includes:
    Crohn's disease of both small and large intestine
K50.9 Crohn's disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Regional enteritis NOS
K51
Ulcerative colitis
K51.0 Ulcerative (chronic) pancolitis
     Includes:
    backwash ileitis
K51.2 Ulcerative (chronic) proctitis
K51.3 Ulcerative (chronic) rectosigmoiditis
K51.4 Inflammatory polyps
K51.5 Left sided colitis
     Includes:
    left hemicolitis
K51.8 Other ulcerative colitis
K51.9 Ulcerative colitis, unspecified
K52
Other noninfective gastroenteritis and colitis
K52.0 Gastroenteritis and colitis due to radiation
K52.1 Toxic gastroenteritis and colitis
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify toxic agent.
K52.2 Allergic and dietetic gastroenteritis and colitis
     Includes:
    Food hypersensitivity gastroenteritis or colitis
K52.3 Indeterminate colitis
433
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K52.8 
K52.8
Other specified noninfective gastroenteritis and colitis
Includes:
Eosinophilic gastritis or gastroenteritis
K52.9 Noninfective gastroenteritis and colitis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Diarrhoea
   Enteritis
  Ileitis
 specified as noninfectious
Jejunitis
Sigmoiditis
Excludes:
colitis, diarrhoea, enteritis, gastroenteritis:
•
 infectious (A09.0)
•
 unspecified origin (A09.9)
functional diarrhoea (K59.1)
neonatal diarrhoea (noninfective) (P78.3)
psychogenic diarrhoea (F45.3)
434
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
Other diseases of intestines
(K55-K63)
K55
K56.0
Vascular disorders of intestine
Excludes:
necrotizing enterocolitis of fetus or newborn (P77)
K55.0 Acute vascular disorders of intestine
     Includes:
    Acute:
   •
    fulminant ischaemic colitis
   •
    intestinal infarction
   •
    small intestine ischaemia
   Mesenteric (artery)(vein):
  •
   embolism
  •
   infarction
  •
   thrombosis
  Subacute ischaemic colitis
K55.1 Chronic vascular disorders of intestine
     Includes:
    Chronic ischaemic:
   •
    colitis
   •
    enteritis
   •
    enterocolitis
   Ischaemic stricture of intestine
  Mesenteric:
 •
  atherosclerosis
 •
  vascular insufficiency
K55.2 Angiodysplasia of colon
     Includes:
    cecal angiodysplasia
K55.20o Angiodysplasia of colon with bleeding
K55.21o Angiodysplasia of colon without bleeding
K55.8 Other vascular disorders of intestine
     Includes:
    Dieulafoy's lesion (hemorrhagic) of colon and cecum
K55.9 Vascular disorder of intestine, unspecified
     Includes:
    Ischaemic:
   •
    colitis NOS
   •
    enteritis NOS
   •
    enterocolitis NOS
K56
Paralytic ileus and intestinal obstruction without hernia
Excludes:
K56.0
congenital stricture or stenosis of intestine (Q41-Q42)
ischaemic stricture of intestine (K55.1)
meconium ileus (E84.1)
obstruction of duodenum (K31.5)
postoperative intestinal obstruction (K91.3)
stenosis of anus or rectum (K62.4)
with hernia (K40-K46)
Paralytic ileus
Includes:
Paralysis of:
•
bowel
•
colon
•
intestine
Excludes:
gallstone ileus (K56.3)
ileus NOS (K56.7)
obstructive ileus NOS (K56.6)
435
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K56.1 Intussusception
     Includes:
    Intussusception or invagination of:
   •
    bowel
   •
    colon
   •
    intestine
   •
    rectum
   Excludes:
  intussusception of appendix (K38.8)
K56.2 Volvulus
     Includes:
K56.1
Strangulation
Torsion
Twist
of colon or intestine
K56.3 Gallstone ileus
     Includes:
    Obstruction of intestine by gallstone
K56.4 Other impaction of intestine
     Includes:
    Enterolith
   Impaction (of):
  •
   colon
  •
   faecal
K56.5 Intestinal adhesions [bands] with obstruction
     Includes:
    Peritoneal adhesions [bands] with intestinal obstruction
K56.6 Other and unspecified intestinal obstruction
     Includes:
    Enterostenosis
   Obstructive ileus NOS
  Occlusion
 Stenosis
of colon or intestine
Stricture
Ogilvie's syndrome
Excludes:
other and unspecified neonatal obstruction classifiable to (P76.8, P76.9)
K56.7 Ileus, unspecified
K57
Diverticular disease of intestine
Includes:
Excludes:
diverticulitis
diverticulosis
of (small)(large) intestine
diverticulum
congenital diverticulum of intestine (Q43.8)
diverticulum of appendix (K38.2)
Meckel's diverticulum (Q43.0)
K57.0 Diverticular disease of small intestine with perforation and abscess
     Includes:
    Diverticular disease of small intestine with peritonitis
   Excludes:
  diverticular disease of both small and large intestine with perforation and abscess (K57.4)
K57.1 Diverticular disease of small intestine without perforation or abscess
     Includes:
    Diverticular disease of small intestine NOS
   Excludes:
  diverticular disease of both small and large intestine without perforation or abscess (K57.5)
K57.2 Diverticular disease of large intestine with perforation and abscess
     Includes:
    Diverticular disease of colon with peritonitis
   Excludes:
  diverticular disease of both small and large intestine with perforation and abscess (K57.4)
K57.3 Diverticular disease of large intestine without perforation or abscess
     Includes:
    Diverticular disease of colon NOS
   Excludes:
  diverticular disease of both small and large intestine without perforation or abscess (K57.5)
436
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K57.4 Diverticular disease of both small and large intestine with perforation and abscess
     Includes:
    Diverticular disease of both small and large intestine with peritonitis
K57.5 Diverticular disease of both small and large intestine without perforation or abscess
     Includes:
    Diverticular disease of both small and large intestine NOS
K57.8 Diverticular disease of intestine, part unspecified, with perforation and abscess
     Includes:
    Diverticular disease of intestine NOS with peritonitis
K57.9 Diverticular disease of intestine, part unspecified, without perforation or abscess
     Includes:
    Diverticular disease of intestine NOS
K58
K60.3
Irritable bowel syndrome
Includes:
irritable colon
K58.0 Irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhoea
K58.9 Irritable bowel syndrome without diarrhoea
     Includes:
    Irritable bowel syndrome NOS
   spastic:
  •
   colon
  •
   gut syndrome
  Excludes:
 pseudomembranous colitis specified as due to bacterial infection (A04.7)
K59
Other functional intestinal disorders
Excludes:
change in bowel habit NOS (R19.4)
functional disorders of stomach (K31.-)
intestinal malabsorption (K90.-)
psychogenic intestinal disorders (F45.3)
K59.0 Constipation
K59.1 Functional diarrhoea
K59.2 Neurogenic bowel, not elsewhere classified
K59.3 Megacolon, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Dilatation of colon
   Toxic megacolon
  Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify toxic agent.
 Excludes:
megacolon (in):
•
 Chagas' disease (B57.3)
•
 congenital (aganglionic) (Q43.1)
•
 Hirschsprung's disease (Q43.1)
K59.4 Anal spasm
     Includes:
    Proctalgia fugax
K59.8 Other specified functional intestinal disorders
     Includes:
    Atony of colon
K59.9 Functional intestinal disorder, unspecified
K60
Fissure and fistula of anal and rectal regions
Excludes:
with abscess or cellulitis (K61.-)
K60.0 Acute anal fissure
K60.1 Chronic anal fissure
K60.2 Anal fissure, unspecified
K60.3 Anal fistula
437
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K60.4 Rectal fistula
     Includes:
    Fistula of rectum to skin
   Excludes:
  fistula:
 •
  rectovaginal (N82.3)
 •
  vesicorectal (N32.1)
K60.5 Anorectal fistula
K60.4
K61
Abscess of anal and rectal regions
Includes:
abscess
cellulitis
of anal and rectal regions with or without fistula
K61.0 Anal abscess
     Includes:
    Perianal abscess
   Excludes:
  intrasphincteric abscess (K61.4)
K61.1 Rectal abscess
     Includes:
    Perirectal abscess
   Excludes:
  ischiorectal abscess (K61.3)
K61.2 Anorectal abscess
K61.3 Ischiorectal abscess
     Includes:
    Abscess of ischiorectal fossa
K61.4 Intrasphincteric abscess
K62
Other diseases of anus and rectum
Includes:
Excludes:
anal canal
colostomy and enterostomy malfunction (K91.4-)
faecal incontinence (R15)
haemorrhoids (I84.-)
ulcerative proctitis (K51.2)
K62.0 Anal polyp
K62.1 Rectal polyp
     Excludes:
    adenomatous polyp (D12.8)
   rectosigmoid polyp (K63.5)
K62.2 Anal prolapse
     Includes:
    Prolapse of anal canal
K62.3 Rectal prolapse
     Includes:
    Prolapse of rectal mucosa
K62.4 Stenosis of anus and rectum
     Includes:
    Stricture of anus (sphincter)
K62.5 Haemorrhage of anus and rectum
     Excludes:
    neonatal rectal haemorrhage (P54.2)
K62.6 Ulcer of anus and rectum
     Includes:
    Ulcer:
   •
    solitary
   •
    stercoral
   Excludes:
  fissure and fistula of anus and rectum (K60.-)
 in ulcerative colitis (K51.-)
K62.7 Radiation proctitis
K62.8 Other specified diseases of anus and rectum
K62.9 Disease of anus and rectum, unspecified
438
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K63
Other diseases of intestine
K63.0 K63.1 Perforation of intestine (nontraumatic)
           Excludes:
          perforation (nontraumatic) of:
         •
          appendix (K35.2, K35.3)
         •
          duodenum (K26.-)
         with diverticular disease (K57.-)
K63.2 Fistula of intestine
     Excludes:
    fistula (of):
   •
    anal and rectal regions (K60.-)
   •
    appendix (K38.3)
   •
    duodenum (K31.6)
   •
    intestinal-genital, female (N82.2-N82.4)
   •
    vesicointestinal (N32.1)
K63.3 Ulcer of intestine
     Includes:
    Primary ulcer of small intestine
   Excludes:
  ulcer (of):
 •
  anus or rectum (K62.6)
 •
  duodenal (K26.-)
 •
  gastrointestinal (K28.-)
 •
  gastrojejunal (K28.-)
 •
  jejunal (K28.-)
 •
  peptic, site unspecified (K27.-)
 ulcerative colitis (K51.-)
K63.4 Enteroptosis
K63.5 Polyp of colon
     Includes:
    rectosigmoid polyp
   Excludes:
  adenomatous polyp
 polyposis
K63.9
Abscess of intestine
Excludes:
abscess of:
•
 anal and rectal regions (K61.-)
•
 appendix (K35.3)
with diverticular disease (K57.-)
of colon (D12.6)
K63.8 Other specified diseases of intestine
     Includes:
    Dieulafoy's lesion of intestine
K63.80o Angiodysplasia of small intestine, except duodenum with bleeding
K63.81o Angiodysplasia of small intestine, except duodenum without bleeding
K63.88o Other specified diseases of intestine (small)(large)
       Includes:
      Dieulafoy's lesion (hemorrhagic) of small intestine, except duodenum
     Excludes:
    angiodysplasia (cecum) (colon) (K55.2)
K63.9 Disease of intestine, unspecified
439
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K65
Diseases of peritoneum
(K65-K67)
K65
Peritonitis
Excludes:
peritonitis:
•
aseptic (T81.6)
•
benign paroxysmal (E85.0)
•
chemical (T81.6)
•
due to talc or other foreign substance (T81.6)
•
neonatal (P78.0-P78.1)
•
pelvic, female (N73.3-N73.5)
•
periodic familial (E85.0)
•
puerperal (O85)
•
with or following:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07,O08.0)
•
appendicitis (K35.-)
•
diverticular disease of intestine (K57.-)
K65.0 Acute peritonitis
     Includes:
    Abscess (of):
   •
    abdominopelvic
   •
    mesenteric
   •
    omentum
   •
    peritoneum
   •
    retrocaecal
   •
    retroperitoneal
   •
    subdiaphragmatic
   •
    subhepatic
   •
    subphrenic
   Peritonitis (acute):
  •
   generalized
  •
   pelvic, male
  •
   subphrenic
  •
   suppurative
  Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
K65.8 Other peritonitis
     Includes:
    Chronic proliferative peritonitis
   Mesenteric:
  •
   fat necrosis
  •
   saponification
  Peritonitis due to:
 •
  bile
 •
  urine
K65.9 Peritonitis, unspecified
K66
Other disorders of peritoneum
Excludes:
K66.0
440
ascites (R18)
Peritoneal adhesions
Includes:
Adhesions (of):
•
abdominal (wall)
•
diaphragm
•
intestine
•
male pelvis
•
mesenteric
•
omentum
•
stomach
Adhesive bands
Excludes:
adhesions [bands] (of):
•
female pelvis (N73.6)
•
with intestinal obstruction (K56.5)
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K66.1 Haemoperitoneum
     Excludes:
    traumatic haemoperitoneum (S36.8)
K66.8 Other specified disorders of peritoneum
K66.9 Disorder of peritoneum, unspecified
K67*
K67.8*
Disorders of peritoneum in infectious diseases classified elsewhere
K67.0* Chlamydial peritonitis (A74.8†)
K67.1* Gonococcal peritonitis (A54.8†)
K67.2* Syphilitic peritonitis (A52.7†)
K67.3* Tuberculous peritonitis (A18.3†)
K67.8* Other disorders of peritoneum in infectious diseases classified elsewhere
441
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K70
Diseases of liver
(K70-K77)
Excludes:
K70
haemochromatosis (E83.1-)
jaundice NOS (R17)
Reye's syndrome (G93.7)
viral hepatitis (B15-B19)
Wilson's disease (E83.0)
Alcoholic liver disease
K70.0 Alcoholic fatty liver
K70.1 Alcoholic hepatitis
K70.2 Alcoholic fibrosis and sclerosis of liver
K70.3 Alcoholic cirrhosis of liver
     Includes:
    Alcoholic cirrhosis NOS
K70.4 Alcoholic hepatic failure
     Includes:
    Alcoholic hepatic failure:
   •
    NOS
   •
    acute
   •
    chronic
   •
    subacute
   •
    with or without hepatic coma
K70.9 Alcoholic liver disease, unspecified
K71
Toxic liver disease
Includes:
drug-induced
•
idiosyncratic
(unpredictable)
liver disease
•
toxic (predictable)
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify toxic agent.
Excludes:
alcoholic liver disease (K70.-)
Budd-Chiari syndrome (I82.0)
K71.0 Toxic liver disease with cholestasis
     Includes:
    "Pure" cholestasis
   Cholestasis with hepatocyte injury
K71.1 Toxic liver disease with hepatic necrosis
     Includes:
    Hepatic failure (acute)(chronic) due to drugs
K71.2 Toxic liver disease with acute hepatitis
K71.3 Toxic liver disease with chronic persistent hepatitis
K71.4 Toxic liver disease with chronic lobular hepatitis
K71.5 Toxic liver disease with chronic active hepatitis
     Includes:
    Toxic liver disease with lupoid hepatitis
K71.6 Toxic liver disease with hepatitis, not elsewhere classified
K71.7 Toxic liver disease with fibrosis and cirrhosis of liver
K71.8 Toxic liver disease with other disorders of liver
     Includes:
    Toxic liver disease with:
   •
    focal nodular hyperplasia
   •
    hepatic granulomas
   •
    peliosis hepatis
   •
    veno-occlusive disease of liver
K71.9 Toxic liver disease, unspecified
442
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K72
Hepatic failure, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Excludes:
hepatic:
•
coma NOS
•
encephalopathy NOS
hepatitis
•
acute
•
fulminant
•
malignant
K74.5
NEC, with hepatic failure
liver (cell) necrosis with hepatic failure
yellow liver atrophy or dystrophy
alcoholic hepatic failure (K70.4)
hepatic failure complicating:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07,O08.8)
•
pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O26.6-)
icterus of fetus and newborn (P55-P59)
viral hepatitis with coma (B15-B19)
with toxic (drug induced) liver disease (K71.1)
K72.0 Acute and subacute hepatic failure
K72.1 Chronic hepatic failure
K72.9 Hepatic failure, unspecified
K73
Chronic hepatitis, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
hepatitis (chronic):
•
alcoholic (K70.1)
•
drug-induced (K71.-)
•
granulomatous NEC (K75.3)
•
reactive, nonspecific (K75.2)
•
viral (B15-B19)
K73.0 Chronic persistent hepatitis, not elsewhere classified
K73.1 Chronic lobular hepatitis, not elsewhere classified
K73.2 Chronic active hepatitis, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Lupoid hepatitis NEC
K73.8 Other chronic hepatitis, not elsewhere classified
K73.9 Chronic hepatitis, unspecified
K74
Fibrosis and cirrhosis of liver
Excludes:
alcoholic fibrosis of liver (K70.2)
cardiac sclerosis of liver (K76.1)
cirrhosis (of liver):
•
alcoholic (K70.3)
•
congenital (P78.80)
with toxic liver disease (K71.7)
K74.0 Hepatic fibrosis
K74.1 Hepatic sclerosis
K74.2 Hepatic fibrosis with hepatic sclerosis
K74.3 Primary biliary cirrhosis
     Includes:
    Chronic nonsuppurative destructive cholangitis
K74.4 Secondary biliary cirrhosis
K74.5 Biliary cirrhosis, unspecified
443
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K74.6
K74.6
K75
Other and unspecified cirrhosis of liver
Includes:
Cirrhosis (of liver):
•
NOS
•
cryptogenic
•
macronodular
•
micronodular
•
mixed type
•
portal
•
postnecrotic
Other inflammatory liver diseases
Excludes:
chronic hepatitis NEC (K73.-)
hepatitis:
•
acute or subacute (K72.0)
•
viral (B15-B19)
toxic liver disease (K71.-)
K75.0 Abscess of liver
     Includes:
    Hepatic abscess:
   •
    NOS
   •
    cholangitic
   •
    haematogenic
   •
    lymphogenic
   •
    pylephlebitic
   Excludes:
  amoebic liver abscess (A06.4)
 cholangitis without liver abscess (K83.0)
pylephlebitis without liver abscess (K75.1)
K75.1 Phlebitis of portal vein
     Includes:
    Pylephlebitis
   Excludes:
  pylephlebitic liver abscess (K75.0)
K75.2 Nonspecific reactive hepatitis
K75.3 Granulomatous hepatitis, not elsewhere classified
K75.4 Autoimmune hepatitis
K75.8 Other specified inflammatory liver diseases
K75.9 Inflammatory liver disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Hepatitis NOS
K76
Other diseases of liver
Excludes:
alcoholic liver disease (K70.-)
amyloid degeneration of liver (E85.-)
cystic disease of liver (congenital) (Q44.6)
hepatic vein thrombosis (I82.0)
hepatomegaly NOS (R16.0)
portal vein thrombosis (I81)
toxic liver disease (K71.-)
K76.0 Fatty (change of) liver, not elsewhere classified
K76.1 Chronic passive congestion of liver
     Includes:
    Cardiac:
   •
    cirrhosis (so-called)
   •
    sclerosis
of liver
K76.2 Central haemorrhagic necrosis of liver
     Excludes:
    liver necrosis with hepatic failure (K72.-)
K76.3 Infarction of liver
444
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K76.4 Peliosis hepatis
     Includes:
    Hepatic angiomatosis
K76.5 Hepatic veno-occlusive disease
     Excludes:
    Budd-Chiari syndrome (I82.0)
K76.6 Portal hypertension
K76.7 Hepatorenal syndrome
     Excludes:
    following labour and delivery (O90.4)
K76.8 Other specified diseases of liver
     Includes:
    Focal nodular hyperplasia of liver
   Hepatoptosis
  Simple cyst of liver
K76.9 Liver disease, unspecified
K77*
K77.8*
Liver disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
K77.0* Liver disorders in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Hepatitis:
    •
     cytomegaloviral (B25.1†)
      •
       herpesviral [herpes simplex] (B00.8†)
        •
         toxoplasma (B58.1†)
          Hepatosplenic schistosomiasis (B65.-†)
           Portal hypertension in schistosomiasis (B65.-†)
            Syphilitic liver disease (A52.7†)
K77.8* Liver disorders in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Hepatic granulomas in:
    •
     berylliosis (J63.2†)
      •
       sarcoidosis (D86.8†)
445
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K80
Disorders of gallbladder, biliary tract and pancreas
(K80-K87)
K80
Cholelithiasis
K80 Cholelithiasis Without mention of With obstruction
                   obstruction 
K80.0 Calculus of gallbladder with acute K80.00o K80.01o
cholecystitis 
K80.10o K80.11o
K80.2 Calculus of gallbladder without cholecystitis K80.20o K80.21o
Includes
• Any condition listed in K80.2 with acute cholecystitis
K80.1 Calculus of gallbladder with other
cholecystitis
Includes
• Any condition listed in K80.2 with cholecystitis (chronic)
• Cholecystitis with cholelithiasis NOS
Includes
•
•
Gallstone (impacted) of:
•
cystic duct
•
gallbladder
Cholecystolithiasis unspecified or without cholecystitis
Cholelithiasis unspecified or without cholecystitis
Colic (recurrent) of gallbladder unspecified or without cholecystitis
K80.3 Calculus of bile duct with cholangitis
K80.30o K80.31o
K80.40o K80.41o
K80.50o K80.51o
K80.80o K80.81o
Includes
• Any condition listed in K80.5 with cholangitis
K80.4 Calculus of bile duct with cholecystitis
Includes
• Any condition listed in K80.5 with cholecystitis (with cholangitis)
K80.5 Calculus of bile duct without cholangitis or
cholecystitis
Includes
• Gallstone (impacted) of bile duct unspecified or without cholangitis
or cholecystitis
• Gallstone (impacted) of hepatic duct unspecified or without
cholangitis or cholecystitis
• Hepatic cholelithiasis unspecified or without cholangitis or
cholecystitis
• Hepatic colic (recurrent) unspecified or without cholangitis or
cholecystitis
• Choledocolithiasis unspecified or without cholangitis or
cholecystitis
K80.8 Other cholelithiasis
446
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K81
Cholecystitis
Excludes:
K81.0
with cholelithiasis (K80.-)
K83
Acute cholecystitis
Includes:
Cholecystitis:
•
emphysematous (acute)
•
gangrenous
•
suppurative
Abscess of gallbladder
Angiocholecystitis
Empyema of gallbladder
Gangrene of gallbladder
K81.1 Chronic cholecystitis
K81.8 Other cholecystitis
K81.9 
without calculus
Cholecystitis, unspecified
K82
Other diseases of gallbladder
Excludes:
K82.0
nonvisualization of gallbladder (R93.2)
postcholecystectomy syndrome (K91.5)
Obstruction of gallbladder
Includes:
Occlusion
Stenosis
Stricture
Excludes:
with cholelithiasis (K80.-)
of cystic duct or gallbladder without calculus
K82.1 Hydrops of gallbladder
     Includes:
    Mucocele of gallbladder
K82.2 Perforation of gallbladder
     Includes:
    Rupture of cystic duct or gallbladder
K82.3 Fistula of gallbladder
     Includes:
    Cholecystocolic fistula
   Cholecystoduodenal fistula
K82.4 Cholesterolosis of gallbladder
     Includes:
    Strawberry gallbladder
K82.8 Other specified diseases of gallbladder
     Includes:
    Adhesions
   Atrophy
  Cyst
 Dyskinesia
of cystic duct or gallbladder
Hypertrophy
Nonfunctioning
Ulcer
Rokitansky-Aschoff sinus disorder of gallbladder
K82.9 Disease of gallbladder, unspecified
K83
Other diseases of biliary tract
Excludes:
postcholecystectomy syndrome (K91.5)
the listed conditions involving the:
•
cystic duct (K81-K82)
•
gallbladder (K81-K82)
447
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K83.0 Cholangitis
     Includes:
    Cholangitis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    ascending
   •
    primary
   •
    recurrent
   •
    sclerosing
   •
    secondary
   •
    stenosing
   •
    suppurative
   Excludes:
  cholangitic liver abscess (K75.0)
 cholangitis with choledocholithiasis (K80.3- K80.4-)
chronic nonsuppurative destructive cholangitis (K74.3)
K83.1 Obstruction of bile duct
     Includes:
    Occlusion
   Stenosis
  Stricture
K83.0
Excludes:
of bile duct without calculus
with cholelithiasis (K80.-)
K83.2 Perforation of bile duct
     Includes:
    Rupture of bile duct
K83.3 Fistula of bile duct
     Includes:
    Choledochoduodenal fistula
K83.4 Spasm of sphincter of Oddi
K83.5 Biliary cyst
K83.8 Other specified diseases of biliary tract
     Includes:
    Adhesions
   Atrophy
  of bile duct
 Hypertrophy
Ulcer
K83.9 Disease of biliary tract, unspecified
K85
Acute pancreatitis
Includes:
Abscess of pancreas
Acute pancreatitis with pancreatic insufficiency
Necrosis of pancreas:
•
acute
•
infective
Pancreatitis:
•
NOS
•
acute (recurrent)
•
haemorrhagic
•
subacute
•
suppurative
K85.0 Idiopathic acute pancreatitis
K85.1 Biliary acute pancreatitis
     Includes:
    Gallstone pancreatitis
K85.2 Alcohol-induced acute pancreatitis
K85.3 Drug-induced acute pancreatitis
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX), if desired, to identify drug
K85.8 Other acute pancreatitis
K85.9 Acute pancreatitis, unspecified
448
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K86
Other diseases of pancreas
Excludes:
fibrocystic disease of pancreas (E84.-)
islet cell tumour (of pancreas) (D13.7)
pancreatic steatorrhoea (K90.3)
K86.0 Alcohol-induced chronic pancreatitis
K86.1 Other chronic pancreatitis
     Includes:
    Chronic pancreatitis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    infectious
   •
    recurrent
   •
    relapsing
   Other chronic pancreatitis with pancreatic insufficiency
K86.2 Cyst of pancreas
K86.3 Pseudocyst of pancreas
K86.8 
K87.1*
Other specified diseases of pancreas
Includes:
Atrophy
Calculus
of pancreas
Cirrhosis
Fibrosis
Pancreatic:
•
infantilism
•
insufficiency
•
necrosis:
•
NOS
•
aseptic
•
fat
K86.9
K87*
Disease of pancreas, unspecified
Disorders of gallbladder, biliary tract and pancreas in diseases classified
elsewhere
K87.0* Disorders of gallbladder and biliary tract in diseases classified elsewhere
K87.1* Disorders of pancreas in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Cytomegaloviral pancreatitis (B25.2†)
      Mumps pancreatitis (B26.3†)
449
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K90
Other diseases of the digestive system
(K90-K93)
K90
Intestinal malabsorption
Excludes:
following gastrointestinal surgery (K91.2)
K90.0 Coeliac disease
     Includes:
    Gluten-sensitive enteropathy
   Idiopathic steatorrhoea
  Nontropical sprue
K90.1 Tropical sprue
     Includes:
    Sprue NOS
   Tropical steatorrhoea
K90.2 Blind loop syndrome, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Blind loop syndrome NOS
   Excludes:
  blind loop syndrome:
 •
  congenital (Q43.8)
 •
  postsurgical (K91.2)
K90.3 Pancreatic steatorrhoea
K90.4 Malabsorption due to intolerance, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Malabsorption due to intolerance to:
   •
    carbohydrate
   •
    fat
   •
    protein
   •
    starch
   Excludes:
  gluten-sensitive enteropathy (K90.0)
 lactose intolerance (E73.-)
K90.8 Other intestinal malabsorption
     Includes:
    Whipple's disease† (M14.8*)
K90.9 Intestinal malabsorption, unspecified
K91
Postprocedural disorders of digestive system, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
gastrojejunal ulcer (K28.-)
radiation:
•
colitis (K52.0)
•
gastroenteritis (K52.0)
•
proctitis (K62.7)
K91.0 Vomiting following gastrointestinal surgery
K91.1 Postgastric surgery syndromes
     Includes:
    Syndrome:
   •
    dumping
   •
    postgastrectomy
   •
    postvagotomy
K91.2 Postsurgical malabsorption, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Postsurgical blind loop syndrome
   Excludes:
  malabsorption:
 •
  osteomalacia in adults (M83.2)
 •
  osteoporosis, postsurgical (M81.3)
K91.3 Postoperative intestinal obstruction
     Use additional code to identify specific obstruction.
K91.4 Colostomy and enterostomy malfunction
K91.40o Haemorrhage from colostomy stoma
       Excludes:
      haemorrhage complicating the procedure (T81.0)
450
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM (K00-K93)
K91.41o
Infection of colostomy stoma
Includes:
Sepsis of colostomy stoma
Excludes:
site of current (healing) surgical wound (T81.4)
K91.42o Malfunction of colostomy stoma, not elsewhere classified
       Includes:
      Complication of colostomy NOS
     Mechanical complication of colostomy
    Peristomal fistulization
   Peristomal hernia
  Peristomal leakage
 Pinhole stoma
Pneumoperitoneum
Prolapse
Skin irritation
Stomal retraction with stenosis
K91.43o Haemorrhage from enterostomy stoma
       Excludes:
      haemorrhage complicating the procedure (T81.0)
K91.44o Infection of enterostomy stoma
       Includes:
      Sepsis of enterostomy stoma
     Excludes:
    site of current (healing) surgical wound (T81.4)
K91.45o Enterostomy malfunction, not elsewhere classified
       Includes:
      Complication of enterostomy NOS
     High stomal output
    Ileostomy flux
   Mechanical complication of enterostomy
  Parastomal fistulization
 Peristomal hernia
Peristomal leakage
Prolapse
Skin irritation
K91.5 Postcholecystectomy syndrome
K91.6 Gastrostomy malfunction
K91.60o Haemorrhage from gastrostomy stoma
       Excludes:
      haemorrhage complicating the procedure (T81.0)
K91.61o Infection of gastrostomy stoma
       Includes:
      Sepsis of gastrostomy stoma
     Excludes:
    site of current (healing) surgical wound (T81.4)
K91.62o Gastrostomy malfunction, not elsewhere classified
       Includes:
      Aspiration due to gastrostomy
     Complication of gastrostomy NOS
    Gastro-colic fistula (postgastrostomy)
   Gastrostomy tube blockage
  Gastrostomy tube dislodgement
 Mechanical complication of gastrostomy
Perforation of the bowel caused by gastrostomy tube
Peristomal (gastrostomy) leakage
Pneumoperitoneum following gastrostomy
K91.8 Other postprocedural disorders of digestive system, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Afferent loop syndrome
   Gastrojejunal loop obstruction syndrome
K91.9 
K91.9
Postprocedural disorder of digestive system, unspecified
451
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K92
Other diseases of digestive system
Excludes:
K92
neonatal gastrointestinal haemorrhage (P54.0-P54.3)
K92.0 Haematemesis
K92.1 Melaena
     Excludes:
occult blood in faeces (R19.50)
K92.2 Gastrointestinal haemorrhage, unspecified
     Includes:
    Haemorrhage:
   •
    gastric NOS
   •
    intestinal NOS
   Excludes:
  acute haemorrhagic gastritis (K29.0)
 haemorrhage of anus and rectum (K62.5)
with peptic ulcer (K25-K28)
K92.8 Other specified diseases of digestive system
K92.80o Mucositis (ulcerative) of the digestive system
       Includes:
      Gastrointestinal mucositis (ulcerative):
     •
      drug-induced
     •
      radiation induced
     Use additional code to identify any agranulocytosis (neutropenia) (D70.0)
    Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX), to identify external agent
   Excludes:
  mucositis (oral) (oropharyngeal) (K12.3)
K92.88o Other specified diseases of digestive system
K92.9 Disease of digestive system, unspecified
K93*
Disorders of other digestive organs in diseases classified elsewhere
K93.0* Tuberculous disorders of intestines, peritoneum and mesenteric glands (A18.3†)
        Excludes:
       tuberculous peritonitis (K67.3*)
K93.1* Megacolon in Chagas' disease (B57.3†)
K93.8* Disorders of other specified digestive organs in diseases classified elsewhere
452
I
CHAPTER XII
Diseases of the skin and subcutaneous tissue
(L00-L99)
Excludes:
certain:
•
conditions originating in the perinatal period (P00-P96)
•
infectious and parasitic diseases (A00-B99)
complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O00-O99)
congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (Q00-Q99)
endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (E00-E90)
injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98)
lipomelanotic reticulosis (I89.8)
neoplasms (C00-D48)
symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified (R00-R99)
systemic connective tissue disorders (M30-M36)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
L00-L08
L10-L14
L20-L30
L40-L45
L50-L54
L55-L59
L60-L75
L80-L99
Infections of the skin and subcutaneous tissue
Bullous disorders
Dermatitis and eczema
Papulosquamous disorders
Urticaria and erythema
Radiation-related disorders of the skin and subcutaneous tissue
Disorders of skin appendages
Other disorders of the skin and subcutaneous tissue
Asterisk categories for this chapter are provided as follows:
L14*
L45*
L54*
L62*
L86*
L99*
Bullous disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Papulosquamous disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Erythema in diseases classified elsewhere
Nail disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Keratoderma in diseases classified elsewhere
Other disorders of skin and subcutaneous tissue in diseases classified elsewhere
453
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
L00
Infections of the skin and subcutaneous tissue
(L00-L08)
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Excludes:
Hordeolum (H00.0)
infective dermatitis (L30.3)
local infections of skin classified in Chapter I, such as:
•
erysipelas (A46)
•
erysipeloid (A26.-)
•
herpesviral [herpes simplex] infection (B00.-):
•
anogenital (A60.-)
•
molluscum contagiosum (B08.1)
•
mycoses (B35-B49)
•
pediculosis, acariasis and other infestations (B85-B89)
•
viral warts (B07)
panniculitis (of):
•
NOS (M79.3)
•
lupus (L93.2)
•
neck and back (M54.0)
•
relapsing [Weber-Christian] (M35.6)
perlèche (due to):
•
NOS (K13.0)
•
candidiasis (B37.-)
•
riboflavin deficiency (E53.0)
pyogenic granuloma (L98.0)
zoster (B02.-)
L00
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
Includes:
Excludes:
L01
pemphigus neonatorum
Ritter's disease
toxic epidermal necrolysis [Lyell] (L51.2)
Impetigo
Excludes:
impetigo herpetiformis (L40.1)
pemphigus neonatorum (L00)
L01.0 Impetigo [any organism] [any site]
     Includes:
    Bockhart's impetigo
L01.1 Impetiginization of other dermatoses
L02
Cutaneous abscess, furuncle and carbuncle
Includes:
Excludes:
boil
furunculosis
anal and rectal regions (K61.-)
genital organs (external):
•
female (N76.4)
•
male (N48.2,N49.-)
L02.0 Cutaneous abscess, furuncle and carbuncle of face
     Excludes:
    ear, external (H60.0)
   eyelid (H00.0)
  head [any part, except face] (L02.8)
 lacrimal:
•
 gland (H04.0)
•
 passages (H04.3)
mouth (K12.2)
nose (J34.0)
orbit (H05.0)
submandibular (K12.2)
L02.1 Cutaneous abscess, furuncle and carbuncle of neck
454
DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE (L00-L99)
L02.2
Cutaneous abscess, furuncle and carbuncle of trunk
Includes:
Abdominal wall
Back [any part, except buttock]
Chest wall
Groin
Perineum
Umbilicus
Excludes:
breast (N61)
hip (L02.4)
omphalitis of newborn (P38)
L02.3 Cutaneous abscess, furuncle and carbuncle of buttock
     Includes:
    Gluteal region
   Excludes:
  pilonidal cyst with abscess (L05.0)
L02.4 Cutaneous abscess, furuncle and carbuncle of limb
     Includes:
    Axilla
   Hip
  Shoulder
L02.8 Cutaneous abscess, furuncle and carbuncle of other sites
     Includes:
    Head [any part, except face]
   Scalp
L02.9 
L03.10o
Cutaneous abscess, furuncle and carbuncle, unspecified
Includes:
Furunculosis NOS
L03
Cellulitis
Includes:
acute lymphangitis
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent
Excludes:
cellulitis of:
•
anal and rectal regions (K61.-)
•
external:
•
auditory canal (H60.1)
•
genital organs:
•
female (N76.4)
•
male (N48.2,N49.-)
•
eyelid (H00.0)
•
lacrimal apparatus (H04.3)
•
mouth (K12.2)
•
nose (J34.0)
eosinophilic cellulitis [Wells] (L98.3)
febrile neutrophilic dermatosis [Sweet] (L98.2)
lymphangitis (chronic)(subacute) (I89.1)
L03.0 Cellulitis of finger and toe
     Includes:
    Infection of nail
   Onychia
  Paronychia
 Perionychia
L03.00o Cellulitis of finger
L03.01o Cellulitis of toe
L03.1 Cellulitis of other parts of limb
L03.10o Cellulitis of upper limb
       Includes:
      Arm
     Axilla
    Hand NOS
   Shoulder
  Wrist
 Excludes:
finger (L03.00)
455
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
L03.11o Cellulitis of lower limb
       Includes:
      Ankle
     Foot NOS
    Hip
   Leg
  Thigh
 Excludes:
toe (L03.01)
L03.2 Cellulitis of face
L03.3 Cellulitis of trunk
     Excludes:
    omphalitis of newborn (P38)
L03.30o Cellulitis of chest wall
L03.31o Cellulitis of abdominal wall
       Excludes:
      cellulitis of:
     •
      groin (L03.33)
     •
      umbilicus (L03.32)
L03.32o Cellulitis of umbilicus
L03.33o Cellulitis of groin
L03.34o Cellulitis of back [any part except buttock]
L03.35o Cellulitis of buttock
L03.36o Cellulitis of perineum
L03.39o Cellulitis of trunk, unspecified
L03.8 Cellulitis of other sites
     Includes:
    Head [any part, except face]
   Scalp
L03.9 Cellulitis, unspecified
L03.11o
L04
Acute lymphadenitis
Includes:
abscess (acute)
lymphadenitis, acute
Excludes:
any lymph node, except mesenteric
enlarged lymph nodes (R59.-)
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease resulting in generalized lymphadenopathy (B24)
lymphadenitis:
•
NOS (I88.9)
•
chronic or subacute, except mesenteric (I88.1)
•
mesenteric, nonspecific (I88.0)
L04.0 Acute lymphadenitis of face, head and neck
L04.1 Acute lymphadenitis of trunk
L04.2 Acute lymphadenitis of upper limb
     Includes:
    Axilla
   Shoulder
L04.3 Acute lymphadenitis of lower limb
     Includes:
    Hip
L04.8 Acute lymphadenitis of other sites
L04.9 Acute lymphadenitis, unspecified
456
DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE (L00-L99)
L05
Pilonidal cyst
Includes:
fistula
sinus
L05.0 Pilonidal cyst with abscess
L05.9 
L08.9
coccygeal or pilonidal
Pilonidal cyst without abscess
Includes:
Pilonidal cyst NOS
L08
L08.0
Other local infections of skin and subcutaneous tissue
Pyoderma
Includes:
Excludes:
Dermatitis:
•
purulent
•
septic
•
suppurative
pyoderma gangrenosum (L88)
L08.1 Erythrasma
L08.8 Other specified local infections of skin and subcutaneous tissue
L08.9 Local infection of skin and subcutaneous tissue, unspecified
457
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
L10
Bullous disorders
(L10-L14)
Excludes:
L10
benign familial pemphigus [Hailey-Hailey] (Q82.8)
staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (L00)
toxic epidermal necrolysis [Lyell] (L51.2)
Pemphigus
Excludes:
pemphigus neonatorum (L00)
L10.0 Pemphigus vulgaris
L10.1 Pemphigus vegetans
L10.2 Pemphigus foliaceus
L10.3 Brazilian pemphigus [fogo selvagem]
L10.4 Pemphigus erythematosus
     Includes:
    Senear-Usher syndrome
L10.5 Drug-induced pemphigus
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
L10.8 Other pemphigus
L10.80o Paraneoplastic pemphigus
L10.88o Other pemphigus
L10.9 Pemphigus, unspecified
L11
Other acantholytic disorders
L11.0 Acquired keratosis follicularis
     Excludes:
    keratosis follicularis (congenital) [Darier-White] (Q82.8)
L11.1 Transient acantholytic dermatosis [Grover]
L11.8 Other specified acantholytic disorders
L11.9 Acantholytic disorder, unspecified
L12
Pemphigoid
Excludes:
herpes gestationis (O26.4-)
impetigo herpetiformis (L40.1)
L12.0 Bullous pemphigoid
L12.1 Cicatricial pemphigoid
     Includes:
    Benign mucous membrane pemphigoid
L12.2 Chronic bullous disease of childhood
     Includes:
    Juvenile dermatitis herpetiformis
   Linear IgA disease of childhood
L12.3 Acquired epidermolysis bullosa
     Excludes:
    epidermolysis bullosa (congenital) (Q81.-)
L12.8 Other pemphigoid
L12.9 Pemphigoid, unspecified
458
DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE (L00-L99)
L13
Other bullous disorders
L13.0 L13.1 Subcorneal pustular dermatitis
           Includes:
          Sneddon-Wilkinson disease
L13.8 Other specified bullous disorders
L13.9 
L14*
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Includes:
Duhring's disease
Bullous disorder, unspecified
L14*
Bullous disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
459
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
L20
Dermatitis and eczema
(L20-L30)
Note:
Excludes:
L20
In this block the terms dermatitis and eczema are used synonymously and interchangeably.
chronic (childhood) granulomatous disease (D71)
dermatitis:
•
dry skin (L85.3)
•
factitial (L98.1)
•
gangrenosa (L88)
•
herpetiformis (L13.0)
•
perioral (L71.0)
•
stasis (I83.1-I83.2)
radiation-related disorders of the skin and subcutaneous tissue (L55-L59)
Atopic dermatitis
Excludes:
circumscribed neurodermatitis (L28.0)
L20.0 Besnier's prurigo
L20.8 Other atopic dermatitis
     Includes:
    Eczema:
   •
    flexural NEC
   •
    infantile (acute)(chronic)
   •
    intrinsic (allergic)
   Neurodermatitis:
  •
   atopic
  •
   diffuse
L20.9 Atopic dermatitis, unspecified
L21
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Excludes:
infective dermatitis (L30.3)
L21.0 Seborrhoea capitis
     Includes:
    Cradle cap
   Seborrheic dermatitis (scalp)
L21.1 Seborrhoeic infantile dermatitis
L21.8 Other seborrhoeic dermatitis
L21.9 Seborrhoeic dermatitis, unspecified
L22
Diaper [napkin] dermatitis
Includes:
L23
Allergic contact dermatitis
Includes:
Excludes:
460
Diaper or napkin:
•
erythema
•
rash
Psoriasiform napkin rash
allergic contact eczema
allergy NOS (T78.4)
dermatitis (of):
•
NOS (L30.9)
•
contact NOS (L25.9)
•
diaper [napkin] (L22)
•
due to substances taken internally (L27.-)
•
eyelid (H01.1)
•
irritant contact (L24.-)
•
perioral (L71.0)
eczema of external ear (H60.5)
radiation-related disorders of the skin and subcutaneous tissue (L55-L59)
DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE (L00-L99)
L23.0
Allergic contact dermatitis due to metals
Includes:
Chromium
Nickel
L23.1 Allergic contact dermatitis due to adhesives
     Includes:
    Adhesives in medicinal patches
   Adhesives in other transdermal systems
L23.2 Allergic contact dermatitis due to cosmetics
L23.3 Allergic contact dermatitis due to drugs in contact with skin
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
    Excludes:
   allergic reaction NOS due to drugs (T88.7)
  dermatitis due to ingested drugs and medicaments (L27.0-L27.1)
L23.4 Allergic contact dermatitis due to dyes
L23.5 Allergic contact dermatitis due to other chemical products
     Includes:
    Cement
   Insecticide
  Latex
 Plastic
Rubber
L23.6 Allergic contact dermatitis due to food in contact with skin
     Excludes:
    dermatitis due to ingested food (L27.2)
L23.7 Allergic contact dermatitis due to plants, except food
     Includes:
    Phytophotodermatitis [plant-sun exposure]
L23.8 Allergic contact dermatitis due to other agents
L23.9 
L24.3
Allergic contact dermatitis, unspecified cause
Includes:
Allergic contact eczema NOS
L24
Irritant contact dermatitis
Includes:
Excludes:
irritant contact eczema
allergy NOS (T78.4)
dermatitis (of):
•
NOS (L30.9)
•
allergic contact (L23.-)
•
contact NOS (L25.9)
•
diaper [napkin] (L22)
•
due to substances taken internally (L27.-)
•
eyelid (H01.1)
•
perioral (L71.0)
eczema of external ear (H60.5)
radiation-related disorders of the skin and subcutaneous tissue (L55-L59)
L24.0 Irritant contact dermatitis due to detergents
L24.1 Irritant contact dermatitis due to oils and greases
L24.2 Irritant contact dermatitis due to solvents
     Includes:
    Solvents:
   •
    chlorocompound
   •
    cyclohexane
   •
    ester
   •
    glycol
   •
    hydrocarbon
   •
    ketone
L24.3 Irritant contact dermatitis due to cosmetics
461
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
L24.4 Irritant contact dermatitis due to drugs in contact with skin
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
    Excludes:
   allergic reaction NOS due to drugs (T88.7)
  dermatitis due to ingested drugs and medicaments (L27.0-L27.1)
L24.5 Irritant contact dermatitis due to other chemical products
     Includes:
    Cement
   Insecticide
L24.6 Irritant contact dermatitis due to food in contact with skin
     Excludes:
    dermatitis due to ingested food (L27.2)
L24.7 Irritant contact dermatitis due to plants, except food
L24.8 Irritant contact dermatitis due to other agents
     Includes:
    Dyes
L24.9 Irritant contact dermatitis, unspecified cause
     Includes:
    Irritant contact eczema NOS
L24.4
L25
Unspecified contact dermatitis
Includes:
Excludes:
unspecified contact eczema
allergy NOS (T78.4)
dermatitis (of):
•
NOS (L30.9)
•
allergic contact (L23.-)
•
due to substances taken internally (L27.-)
•
eyelid (H01.1)
•
irritant contact (L24.-)
•
perioral (L71.0)
eczema of external ear (H60.5)
radiation-related disorders of the skin and subcutaneous tissue (L55-L59)
L25.0 Unspecified contact dermatitis due to cosmetics
L25.1 Unspecified contact dermatitis due to drugs in contact with skin
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
    Excludes:
   allergic reaction NOS due to drugs (T88.7)
  dermatitis due to ingested drugs and medicaments (L27.0-L27.1)
L25.2 Unspecified contact dermatitis due to dyes
L25.3 Unspecified contact dermatitis due to other chemical products
     Includes:
    Cement
   Insecticide
L25.4 Unspecified contact dermatitis due to food in contact with skin
     Excludes:
    dermatitis due to ingested food (L27.2)
L25.5 Unspecified contact dermatitis due to plants, except food
L25.8 Unspecified contact dermatitis due to other agents
L25.9 Unspecified contact dermatitis, unspecified cause
     Includes:
    Contact:
   •
    dermatitis (occupational) NOS
   •
    eczema (occupational) NOS
L26
Exfoliative dermatitis
Includes:
Excludes:
462
Exfoliative erythroderma
Hebra's pityriasis
Ritter's disease (L00)
DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE (L00-L99)
L27
Dermatitis due to substances taken internally
Excludes:
adverse:
•
effect NOS of drugs (T88.7)
•
food reaction, except dermatitis (T78.0-T78.1)
allergy NOS (T78.4)
contact dermatitis (L23-L25)
drug:
•
photoallergic response (L56.1)
•
phototoxic response (L56.0)
urticaria (L50.-)
L27.0 Generalized skin eruption due to drugs and medicaments
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
L27.1 Localized skin eruption due to drugs and medicaments
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
L27.2 Dermatitis due to ingested food
     Excludes:
    dermatitis due to food in contact with skin (L23.6)(L24.6) (L25.4)
L27.8 Dermatitis due to other substances taken internally
L27.9 
L29.9
Dermatitis due to unspecified substance taken internally
L28
Lichen simplex chronicus and prurigo
L28.0 Lichen simplex chronicus
     Includes:
    Circumscribed neurodermatitis
   Lichen NOS
L28.1 Prurigo nodularis
L28.2 Other prurigo
     Includes:
    Prurigo:
   •
    NOS
   •
    Hebra
   •
    mitis
   Urticaria papulosa
L29
Pruritus
Excludes:
neurotic excoriation (L98.1)
psychogenic pruritus (F45.8)
L29.0 Pruritus ani
L29.1 Pruritus scroti
L29.2 Pruritus vulvae
L29.3 Anogenital pruritus, unspecified
L29.8 Other pruritus
L29.9 Pruritus, unspecified
     Includes:
    Itch NOS
463
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
L30
Other dermatitis
Excludes:
L30
dermatitis:
•
contact (L23-L25)
•
dry skin (L85.3)
small plaque parapsoriasis (L41.3)
stasis dermatitis (I83.1-I83.2)
L30.0 Nummular dermatitis
L30.1 Dyshidrosis [pompholyx]
L30.2 Cutaneous autosensitization
     Includes:
    Candidid [levurid]
   Dermatophytid
  Eczematid
 Id Reaction
L30.3 Infective dermatitis
     Includes:
    Infectious eczematoid dermatitis
   Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent
L30.4 Erythema intertrigo
L30.5 Pityriasis alba
L30.8 Other specified dermatitis
L30.9 Dermatitis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Eczema NOS
464
DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE (L00-L99)
Papulosquamous disorders
(L40-L45)
L40
L43.9
Psoriasis
L40.0 Psoriasis vulgaris
     Includes:
    Nummular psoriasis
   Plaque psoriasis
L40.1 Generalized pustular psoriasis
     Includes:
    Impetigo herpetiformis
   Von Zumbusch's disease
L40.2 Acrodermatitis continua
L40.3 Pustulosis palmaris et plantaris
L40.4 Guttate psoriasis
L40.5&#x0086;Arthropathic psoriasis (M07.0-M07.3*, M09.0*)
L40.8 Other psoriasis
     Includes:
    Erythroderma psoraticum
   Erythrodermic psoriasis
  Flexural psoriasis
L40.9 Psoriasis, unspecified
L41
Parapsoriasis
Excludes:
poikiloderma vasculare atrophicans (L94.5)
L41.0 Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta
     Includes:
    Mucha-Habermann disease
L41.1 Pityriasis lichenoides chronica
L41.2 Lymphomatoid papulosis
L41.3 Small plaque parapsoriasis
L41.4 Large plaque parapsoriasis
L41.5 Retiform parapsoriasis
L41.8 Other parapsoriasis
L41.9 Parapsoriasis, unspecified
L42 Pityriasis rosea
L43 Lichen planus
Excludes:
lichen planopilaris (L66.1)
L43.0 Hypertrophic lichen planus
L43.1 Bullous lichen planus
L43.2 Lichenoid drug reaction
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
L43.3 Subacute (active) lichen planus
     Includes:
    Lichen planus tropicus
L43.8 Other lichen planus
L43.9 Lichen planus, unspecified
465
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
L44
L44
Other papulosquamous disorders
L44.0 Pityriasis rubra pilaris
L44.1 Lichen nitidus
L44.2 Lichen striatus
L44.3 Lichen ruber moniliformis
L44.4 Infantile papular acrodermatitis [Giannotti-Crosti]
L44.8 Other specified papulosquamous disorders
L44.9 Papulosquamous disorder, unspecified
L45*
466
Papulosquamous disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE (L00-L99)
Urticaria and erythema
(L50-L54)
Excludes:
L50
L53.2
Lyme disease (A69.2)
rosacea (L71.-)
Urticaria
Excludes:
allergic contact dermatitis (L23.-)
angioneurotic oedema (T78.3)
hereditary angio-oedema (E84.1)
Quincke's oedema (T78.3)
urticaria:
•
giant (T78.3)
•
neonatorum (P83.8)
•
papulosa (L28.2)
•
pigmentosa (Q82.2)
•
serum (T80.6)
•
solar (L56.3)
L50.0 Allergic urticaria
L50.1 Idiopathic urticaria
L50.2 Urticaria due to cold and heat
L50.3 Dermatographic urticaria
L50.4 Vibratory urticaria
L50.5 Cholinergic urticaria
L50.6 Contact urticaria
L50.8 Other urticaria
     Includes:
    Urticaria:
   •
    chronic
   •
    recurrent periodic
L50.9 Urticaria, unspecified
L51
Erythema multiforme
L51.0 Nonbullous erythema multiforme
L51.1 Bullous erythema multiforme
     Includes:
    Stevens-Johnson syndrome
L51.2 Toxic epidermal necrolysis [Lyell]
L51.8 Other erythema multiforme
L51.9 Erythema multiforme, unspecified
L52 Erythema nodosum
L53 Other erythematous conditions
Excludes:
Erythema chronicum migrans due to Borrelia burgdorferi (A69.2)
erythema:
•
ab igne (L59.0)
•
due to external agents in contact with skin (L23-L25)
•
intertrigo (L30.4)
L53.0 Toxic erythema
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify external agent.
    Excludes:
   neonatal erythema toxicum (P83.1)
L53.1 Erythema annulare centrifugum
L53.2 Erythema marginatum
467
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
L53.3 
L53.3
Other chronic figurate erythema
L53.8 Other specified erythematous conditions
L53.9 Erythematous condition, unspecified
     Includes:
    Erythema NOS
   Erythroderma NOS
L54*
Erythema in diseases classified elsewhere
L54.0* Erythema marginatum in acute rheumatic fever (I00†)
L54.8* Erythema in other diseases classified elsewhere
468
DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE (L00-L99)
Radiation-related disorders of the skin and subcutaneous
tissue
(L55-L59)
L55
L57.9
Sunburn
L55.0 Sunburn of first degree
L55.1 Sunburn of second degree
L55.2 Sunburn of third degree
L55.8 Other sunburn
L55.9 Sunburn, unspecified
L56
Other acute skin changes due to ultraviolet radiation
L56.0 Drug phototoxic response
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
L56.1 Drug photoallergic response
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
L56.2 Photocontact dermatitis [berloque dermatitis]
L56.3 Solar urticaria
L56.4 Polymorphous light eruption
L56.8 Other specified acute skin changes due to ultraviolet radiation
L56.9 Acute skin change due to ultraviolet radiation, unspecified
L57
Skin changes due to chronic exposure to nonionizing radiation
L57.0 Actinic keratosis
     Includes:
    Keratosis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    senile
   •
    solar
L57.1 Actinic reticuloid
L57.2 Cutis rhomboidalis nuchae
L57.3 Poikiloderma of Civatte
L57.4 Cutis laxa senilis
     Includes:
    Elastosis senilis
L57.5 Actinic granuloma
L57.8 Other skin changes due to chronic exposure to nonionizing radiation
     Includes:
    Farmer's skin
   Sailor's skin
  Solar dermatitis
L57.9 Skin changes due to chronic exposure to nonionizing radiation, unspecified
469
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
L58
L58
Radiodermatitis
L58.0 Acute radiodermatitis
L58.1 Chronic radiodermatitis
L58.9 Radiodermatitis, unspecified
L59
Other disorders of skin and subcutaneous tissue related to radiation
L59.0 Erythema ab igne [dermatitis ab igne]
L59.8 Other specified disorders of skin and subcutaneous tissue related to radiation
L59.9 Disorder of skin and subcutaneous tissue related to radiation, unspecified
470
DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE (L00-L99)
Disorders of skin appendages
(L60-L75)
Excludes:
L60
L66.0
congenital malformations of integument (Q84.-)
Nail disorders
Excludes:
clubbing of nails (R68.3)
onychia and paronychia (L03.0-)
L60.0 Ingrowing nail
L60.1 Onycholysis
L60.2 Onychogryphosis
L60.3 Nail dystrophy
L60.4 Beau's lines
L60.5 Yellow nail syndrome
L60.8 Other nail disorders
L60.9 Nail disorder, unspecified
L62*
Nail disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
L62.0* Clubbed nail pachydermoperiostosis (M89.4†)
L62.8* Nail disorders in other diseases classified elsewhere
L63
Alopecia areata
L63.0 Alopecia (capitis) totalis
L63.1 Alopecia universalis
L63.2 Ophiasis
L63.8 Other alopecia areata
L63.9 Alopecia areata, unspecified
L64
Androgenic alopecia
Includes:
male-pattern baldness
L64.0 Drug-induced androgenic alopecia
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
L64.8 Other androgenic alopecia
L64.9 Androgenic alopecia, unspecified
L65 Other nonscarring hair loss
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
Excludes:
trichotillomania (F63.3)
L65.0 Telogen effluvium
L65.1 Anagen effluvium
L65.2 Alopecia mucinosa
L65.8 Other specified nonscarring hair loss
L65.9 Nonscarring hair loss, unspecified
     Includes:
    Alopecia NOS
L66
L66.0
Cicatricial alopecia [scarring hair loss]
Pseudopelade
471
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
L66.1 
L66.1
Lichen planopilaris
Includes:
Follicular lichen planus
L66.2 Folliculitis decalvans
L66.3 Perifolliculitis capitis abscedens
     Excludes:
    Dissecting cellulitis of the scalp (L03.8)
L66.4 Folliculitis ulerythematosa reticulata
L66.8 Other cicatricial alopecia
L66.9 Cicatricial alopecia, unspecified
L67
Hair colour and hair shaft abnormalities
Excludes:
monilethrix (Q84.1)
pili annulati (Q84.1)
telogen effluvium (L65.0)
L67.0 Trichorrhexis nodosa
L67.1 Variations in hair colour
     Includes:
    Canities
   Greyness, hair (premature)
  Heterochromia of hair
 Poliosis:
•
 NOS
•
 circumscripta, acquired
L67.8 Other hair colour and hair shaft abnormalities
     Includes:
    Fragilitas crinium
L67.9 Hair colour and hair shaft abnormality, unspecified
L68
Hypertrichosis
Includes:
Excludes:
excess hair
congenital hypertrichosis (Q84.2)
persistent lanugo (Q84.2)
L68.0 Hirsutism
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
L68.1 Acquired hypertrichosis lanuginosa
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
L68.2 Localized hypertrichosis
L68.3 Polytrichia
L68.8 Other hypertrichosis
L68.9 Hypertrichosis, unspecified
L70
Acne
Excludes:
acne keloid (L73.0)
L70.0 Acne vulgaris
L70.1 Acne conglobata
L70.2 Acne varioliformis
     Includes:
    Acne necrotica miliaris
L70.3 Acne tropica
L70.4 Infantile acne
L70.5 Acné excoriée des jeunes filles
L70.8 Other acne
L70.9 Acne, unspecified
472
DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE (L00-L99)
L71
Rosacea
L71.0 L71.1 Rhinophyma
L71.8 Other rosacea
L71.9 
L75.9
Perioral dermatitis
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
Rosacea, unspecified
L72
Follicular cysts of skin and subcutaneous tissue
L72.0 Epidermal cyst
L72.1 Trichilemmal cyst
     Includes:
    Pilar cyst
   Sebaceous cyst
L72.2 Steatocystoma multiplex
L72.8 Other follicular cysts of skin and subcutaneous tissue
L72.9 Follicular cyst of skin and subcutaneous tissue, unspecified
L73
Other follicular disorders
L73.0 Acne keloid
L73.1 Pseudofolliculitis barbae
L73.2 Hidradenitis suppurativa
L73.8 Other specified follicular disorders
     Includes:
    Sycosis barbae
L73.9 Follicular disorder, unspecified
L74
Eccrine sweat disorders
Excludes:
hyperhidrosis (R61.-)
L74.0 Miliaria rubra
L74.1 Miliaria crystallina
L74.2 Miliaria profunda
     Includes:
    Miliaria tropicalis
L74.3 Miliaria, unspecified
L74.4 Anhidrosis
     Includes:
    Hypohidrosis
L74.8 Other eccrine sweat disorders
L74.9 Eccrine sweat disorder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Sweat gland disorder NOS
L75
Apocrine sweat disorders
Excludes:
dyshidrosis [pompholyx] (L30.1)
hidradenitis suppurativa (L73.2)
L75.0 Bromhidrosis
L75.1 Chromhidrosis
L75.2 Apocrine miliaria
     Includes:
    Fox-Fordyce disease
L75.8 Other apocrine sweat disorders
L75.9 Apocrine sweat disorder, unspecified
473
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
L80
Other disorders of the skin and subcutaneous tissue
(L80-L99)
L80 Vitiligo
L81 Other disorders of pigmentation
Excludes:
birthmark NOS (Q82.5)
naevus - see Alphabetical Index
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (Q85.8)
L81.0 Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation
L81.1 Chloasma
L81.2 Freckles
L81.3 Café au lait spots
L81.4 Other melanin hyperpigmentation
     Includes:
    Lentigo
L81.5 Leukoderma, not elsewhere classified
L81.6 Other disorders of diminished melanin formation
L81.7 Pigmented purpuric dermatosis
     Includes:
    Angioma serpiginosum
L81.8 Other specified disorders of pigmentation
     Includes:
    Iron pigmentation
   Tattoo pigmentation
L81.9 Disorder of pigmentation, unspecified
L82
Seborrhoeic keratosis
Includes:
L83
Acanthosis nigricans
Includes:
L84
Confluent and reticulated papillomatosis
Corns and callosities
Includes:
L85
Dermatosis papulosa nigra
Leser-Trélat disease
Callus
Clavus
Other epidermal thickening
Excludes:
hypertrophic disorders of skin (L91.-)
L85.0 Acquired ichthyosis
     Excludes:
    congenital ichthyosis (Q80.-)
L85.1 Acquired keratosis [keratoderma] palmaris et plantaris
     Excludes:
    inherited keratosis palmaris et plantaris (Q82.8)
L85.2 Keratosis punctata (palmaris et plantaris)
L85.3 Xerosis cutis
     Includes:
    Dry skin dermatitis
L85.8 Other specified epidermal thickening
     Includes:
    Cutaneous horn
L85.9 Epidermal thickening, unspecified
474
DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE (L00-L99)
L86*
Keratoderma in diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Follicular keratosis
Xeroderma
L87
L89.9
due to a vitamin A deficiency (E50.8†)
Transepidermal elimination disorders
Excludes:
granuloma annulare (perforating) (L92.0)
L87.0 Keratosis follicularis et parafollicularis in cutem penetrans [Kyrle]
     Includes:
    Hyperkeratosis follicularis penetrans
L87.1 Reactive perforating collagenosis
L87.2 Elastosis perforans serpiginosa
L87.8 Other transepidermal elimination disorders
L87.9 Transepidermal elimination disorder, unspecified
L88
Pyoderma gangrenosum
Includes:
L89
Dermatitis gangrenosa
Phagedenic pyoderma
Decubitus [pressure] ulcer and pressure area
Note:
Includes:
For multiple sites of differing stages, assign only one code indicating the highest stage.
Bedsore
Plaster ulcer
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth characters .68 to classify any associated
diabetes mellitus.
Excludes:
decubitus (trophic) ulcer of cervix (uteri) (N86)
L89.0 Stage I decubitus ulcer and pressure area
     Note:
    The ulcer appears as a defined area of persistent redness (erythema) in lightly pigmented skin,
   whereas in darker skin tones, the ulcer may appear with persistent red, blue or purple hues,
  without skin loss.
 Includes:
Decubitus [pressure] ulcer limited to erythema [redness] only, without skin breakdown
L89.1 Stage II decubitus [pressure] ulcer
     Includes:
    Decubitus [pressure] ulcer with:
   •
    abrasion
   •
    blister
   •
    partial thickness skin loss involving epidermis and/or dermis
   •
    skin loss NOS
L89.2 Stage III decubitus [pressure] ulcer
     Note:
    Decubitus [pressure] ulcer with full thickness skin loss involving damage or necrosis of
   subcutaneous tissue extending to, but not through, underlying fascia.
L89.3 Stage IV decubitus [pressure] ulcer
     Note:
    Decubitus [pressure] ulcer with necrosis of muscle, bone or supporting structures (i.e. tendon or
   joint capsule).
L89.8o Decubitus [pressure] ulcer, unstageable
      Note:
     Decubitus [pressure] ulcer with full thickness tissue loss in which the base of the ulcer is covered
    by slough/eschar and therefore, cannot be accurately staged.
   Includes:
  Decubitus ulcer with necrosis involving muscle or bone (Stage X)
L89.9 Decubitus ulcer and pressure area, unspecified
     Includes:
    Decubitus [pressure] ulcer without mention of stage or severity
   Decubitus ulcer NOS
475
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
L90
L90
Atrophic disorders of skin
L90.0 Lichen sclerosus et atrophicus
     Excludes:
    lichen sclerosus of external genital organs:
   •
    female (N90.4)
   •
    male (N48.0)
L90.1 Anetoderma of Schweninger-Buzzi
L90.2 Anetoderma of Jadassohn-Pellizzari
L90.3 Atrophoderma of Pasini and Pierini
L90.4 Acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans
L90.5 Scar conditions and fibrosis of skin
     Includes:
    Adherent scar (skin)
   Cicatrix
  Disfigurement due to scar
 Scar NOS
Excludes:
hypertrophic scar (L91.0)
keloid scar (L91.0)
L90.6 Striae atrophicae
L90.8 Other atrophic disorders of skin
L90.9 Atrophic disorder of skin, unspecified
L91 Hypertrophic disorders of skin
L91.0 Hypertrophic scar
     Includes:
    Keloid scar
   Excludes:
  acne keloid (L73.0)
 scar NOS (L90.5)
L91.8 Other hypertrophic disorders of skin
L91.9 Hypertrophic disorder of skin, unspecified
L92
Granulomatous disorders of skin and subcutaneous tissue
Excludes:
actinic granuloma (L57.5)
L92.0 Granuloma annulare
     Includes:
    Perforating granuloma annulare
L92.1 Necrobiosis lipoidica, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    that associated with diabetes mellitus (E10.61/L99.8*) (E11.61/L99.8*) (E13.61/L99.8*)
   (E14.61/L99.8*)
L92.2 Granuloma faciale [eosinophilic granuloma of skin]
L92.3 Foreign body granuloma of skin and subcutaneous tissue
L92.8 Other granulomatous disorders of skin and subcutaneous tissue
L92.9 Granulomatous disorder of skin and subcutaneous tissue, unspecified
L93
Lupus erythematosus
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
Excludes:
lupus:
•
exedens (A18.4)
•
vulgaris (A18.4)
scleroderma (M34.-)
systemic lupus erythematosus (M32.-)
L93.0 Discoid lupus erythematosus
     Includes:
    Lupus erythematosus NOS
L93.1 Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus
476
DISEASES OF THE SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE (L00-L99)
L93.2
L94
Other local lupus erythematosus
Includes:
Lupus:
•
erythematosus profundus
•
panniculitis
L98.2
Other localized connective tissue disorders
Excludes:
systemic connective tissue disorders (M30-M36)
L94.0 Localized scleroderma [morphea]
     Includes:
    Circumscribed scleroderma
L94.1 Linear scleroderma
     Includes:
    En coup de sabre lesion
L94.2 Calcinosis cutis
L94.3 Sclerodactyly
L94.4 Gottron's papules
L94.5 Poikiloderma vasculare atrophicans
L94.6 Ainhum
L94.8 Other specified localized connective tissue disorders
L94.9 Localized connective tissue disorder, unspecified
L95
Vasculitis limited to skin, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
angioma serpiginosum (L81.7)
Henoch(-Schönlein) purpura (D69.0)
hypersensitivity angiitis (M31.0)
panniculitis (of):
•
NOS (M79.3)
•
lupus (L93.2)
•
neck and back (M54.0)
•
relapsing [Weber-Christian] (M35.6)
polyarteritis nodosa (M30.0)
rheumatoid vasculitis (M05.2)
serum sickness (T80.6)
urticaria (L50.-)
Wegener's granulomatosis (M31.3-)
L95.0 Livedoid vasculitis
     Includes:
    Atrophie blanche (en plaque)
L95.1 Erythema elevatum diutinum
L95.8 Other vasculitis limited to skin
L95.9 Vasculitis limited to skin, unspecified
L97
Ulcer of lower limb, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Excludes:
L98
Chronic skin ulcer of leg and foot
decubitus [pressure] ulcer and pressure area (L89.-)
gangrene (R02)
skin infections (L00-L08)
specific infections classified to A00-B99
varicose ulcer (I83.0, I83.2)
Other disorders of skin and subcutaneous tissue, not elsewhere classified
L98.0 Pyogenic granuloma
L98.1 Factitial dermatitis
     Includes:
    Neurotic excoriation
L98.2 Febrile neutrophilic dermatosis [Sweet]
477
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
L98.3 
L98.3
Eosinophilic cellulitis [Wells]
L98.4 Chronic ulcer of skin, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Chronic ulcer of skin NOS
   Tropical ulcer NOS
  Ulcer of skin NOS
 Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth characters .68 to classify any associated
diabetes mellitus.
Excludes:
decubitus [pressure] ulcer and pressure area (L89.-)
gangrene (R02)
skin infections (L00-L08)
specific infections classified to A00-B99
ulcer of lower limb NEC (L97)
varicose ulcer (I83.0, I83.2)
L98.5 Mucinosis of skin
     Includes:
    Focal mucinosis
   Lichen myxoedematosus
  Excludes:
 focal oral mucinosis (K13.7)
myxoedema (E03.9)
L98.6 Other infiltrative disorders of skin and subcutaneous tissue
     Excludes:
    hyalinosis cutis et mucosae (E78.8)
L98.8 Other specified disorders of skin and subcutaneous tissue
L98.9 Disorder of skin and subcutaneous tissue, unspecified
L99*
Other disorders of skin and subcutaneous tissue in diseases classified
elsewhere
L99.0* Amyloidosis of skin (E85.-†)
        Includes:
       Lichen amyloidosis
      Macular amyloid
L99.8* Other specified disorders of skin and subcutaneous tissue in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Dermatopathy in diabetes mellitus (E10-E14† with common fourth and fifth characters .61)
      Syphilitic:
     •
      alopecia (A51.3†)
       •
        leukoderma (A51.3†,A52.7†)
478
I
CHAPTER XIII
Diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective
tissue
(M00-M99)
Note:
The following fifth characters represent the following sites of involvement
0
Multiple sites
2
Upper arm:
humerus
3
Forearm:
radius
ulna
4
joint
hip
sacroiliac
Lower leg:
fibula
tibia
7
joints between these bones
Pelvic region and thigh:
buttock
femur
pelvis
6
wrist joint
Head:
carpus
fingers
metacarpus
5
elbow joint
knee joint
Ankle and foot:
metatarsus
tarsus
toes
other joints in foot
8
Excludes:
Other:
head
neck
ribs
skull
trunk
vertebral column
9 Site unspecified
certain:
•
conditions originating in the perinatal period (P00-P96)
•
disorders of the temporomandibular joint (K07.6)
•
infectious and parasitic diseases (A00-B99)
compartment syndrome (T79.6)
complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O00-O99)
congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (Q00-Q99)
endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (E00-E90)
injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98)
neoplasms (C00-D48)
symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified (R00-R99)
479
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
This chapter contains the following blocks:
M00-M03
M00-M25
M05-M14
M15-M19
M20-M25
M30-M36
M40-M43
M40-M54
M45-M49
M50-M54
M60-M63
M60-M79
M65-M68
M70-M79
M80-M85
M80-M94
M86-M90
M91-M94
M95-M99
Infectious arthropathies
Arthropathies
Inflammatory polyarthropathies
Arthrosis
Other joint disorders
Systemic connective tissue disorders
Deforming dorsopathies
Dorsopathies
Spondylopathies
Other dorsopathies
Disorders of muscles
Soft tissue disorders
Disorders of synovium and tendon
Other soft tissue disorders
Disorders of bone density and structure
Osteopathies and chondropathies
Other osteopathies
Chondropathies
Other disorders of the musculoskeletal system and connective tissue
Asterisk categories for this chapter are provided as follows:
M01*
M03*
M07*
M09*
M14*
M36*
M49*
M63*
M68*
M73*
M82*
M90*
480
Direct infections of joint in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
Postinfective and reactive arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere
Psoriatic and enteropathic arthropathies
Juvenile arthritis in diseases classified elsewhere
Arthropathies in other diseases classified elsewhere
Systemic disorders of connective tissue in diseases classified elsewhere
Spondylopathies in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of muscle in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of synovium and tendon in diseases classified elsewhere
Soft tissue disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Osteoporosis in diseases classified elsewhere
Osteopathies in diseases classified elsewhere
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
Arthropathies
(M00-M25)
Includes:
M00.20
Disorders affecting predominantly peripheral (limb) joints
Infectious arthropathies
(M00-M03)
Note:
This block comprises arthropathies due to microbiological agents. Distinction is made between the following
types of etiological relationship
a) direct infection of joint, where organisms invade synovial tissue and microbial antigen is present in the joint;
b) indirect infection, which may be of two types: a reactive arthropathy, where microbial infection of the body
is established but neither organisms nor antigens can be identified in the joint, and a postinfective arthropathy,
where microbial antigen is present but recovery of an organism is inconstant and evidence of local
multiplication is lacking.
M00
Pyogenic arthritis
M00.0 Staphylococcal arthritis and polyarthritis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M00.00 Staphylococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, multiple sites
M00.01 Staphylococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, shoulder region
M00.02 Staphylococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, upper arm
M00.03 Staphylococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, forearm
M00.04 Staphylococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, hand
M00.05 Staphylococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, pelvic region and thigh
M00.06 Staphylococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, lower leg
M00.07 Staphylococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, ankle and foot
M00.08 Staphylococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, other site
M00.09 Staphylococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, unspecified site
M00.1 Pneumococcal arthritis and polyarthritis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M00.10 Pneumococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, multiple sites
M00.11 Pneumococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, shoulder region
M00.12 Pneumococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, upper arm
M00.13 Pneumococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, forearm
M00.14 Pneumococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, hand
M00.15 Pneumococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, pelvic region and thigh
M00.16 Pneumococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, lower leg
M00.17 Pneumococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, ankle and foot
M00.18 Pneumococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, other site
M00.19 Pneumococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, unspecified site
M00.2 Other streptococcal arthritis and polyarthritis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M00.20 Other streptococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, multiple sites
481
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M00.21 
M00.21
Other streptococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, shoulder region
M00.22 Other streptococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, upper arm
M00.23 Other streptococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, forearm
M00.24 Other streptococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, hand
M00.25 Other streptococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, pelvic region and thigh
M00.26 Other streptococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, lower leg
M00.27 Other streptococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, ankle and foot
M00.28 Other streptococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, other site
M00.29 Other streptococcal arthritis and polyarthritis, unspecified site
M00.8 Arthritis and polyarthritis due to other specified bacterial agents
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Use additional code (B95-B96) to identify bacterial agent.
M00.80 Arthritis and polyarthritis due to other specified bacterial agents, multiple sites
M00.81 Arthritis and polyarthritis due to other specified bacterial agents, shoulder region
M00.82 Arthritis and polyarthritis due to other specified bacterial agents, upper arm
M00.83 Arthritis and polyarthritis due to other specified bacterial agents, forearm
M00.84 Arthritis and polyarthritis due to other specified bacterial agents, hand
M00.85 Arthritis and polyarthritis due to other specified bacterial agents, pelvic region and thigh
M00.86 Arthritis and polyarthritis due to other specified bacterial agents, lower leg
M00.87 Arthritis and polyarthritis due to other specified bacterial agents, ankle and foot
M00.88 Arthritis and polyarthritis due to other specified bacterial agents, other site
M00.89 Arthritis and polyarthritis due to other specified bacterial agents, unspecified site
M00.9 Pyogenic arthritis, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Infective arthritis NOS
M00.90 Pyogenic arthritis, unspecified, multiple sites
M00.91 Pyogenic arthritis, unspecified, shoulder region
M00.92 Pyogenic arthritis, unspecified, upper arm
M00.93 Pyogenic arthritis, unspecified, forearm
M00.94 Pyogenic arthritis, unspecified, hand
M00.95 Pyogenic arthritis, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M00.96 Pyogenic arthritis, unspecified, lower leg
M00.97 Pyogenic arthritis, unspecified, ankle and foot
M00.98 Pyogenic arthritis, unspecified, other site
M00.99 Pyogenic arthritis, unspecified, unspecified site
M01*
Direct infections of joint in infectious and parasitic diseases classified
elsewhere
Excludes:
arthropathy in sarcoidosis (M14.8*)
postinfective and reactive arthropathy (M03.-*)
M01.0* Meningococcal arthritis (A39.8†)
        Excludes:
       postmeningococcal arthritis (M03.0*)
M01.00* Meningococcal arthritis multiple sites (A39.8†)
M01.01* Meningococcal arthritis, shoulder region (A39.8†)
M01.02* Meningococcal arthritis, upper arm (A39.8†)
482
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M01.03* Meningococcal arthritis, forearm (A39.8†)
M01.04* Meningococcal arthritis, hand (A39.8†)
M01.05* Meningococcal arthritis, pelvic region and thigh (A39.8†)
M01.06* Meningococcal arthritis, lower leg (A39.8†)
M01.07* Meningococcal arthritis, ankle and foot (A39.8†)
M01.08* Meningococcal arthritis, other site (A39.8†)
M01.09* Meningococcal arthritis unspecified site (A39.8†)
M01.1* Tuberculous arthritis (A18.0†)
        Excludes:
       of spine (M49.0*)
M01.10* Tuberculous arthritis, multiple sites (A18.0†)
M01.11* Tuberculous arthritis, shoulder region (A18.0†)
M01.12* Tuberculous arthritis, upper arm (A18.0†)
M01.13* Tuberculous arthritis, forearm (A18.0†)
M01.14* Tuberculous arthritis, hand (A18.0†)
M01.15* Tuberculous arthritis, pelvic region and thigh (A18.0†)
M01.16* Tuberculous arthritis , lower leg (A18.0†)
M01.17* Tuberculous arthritis, ankle and foot (A18.0†)
M01.18* Tuberculous arthritis, other site (A18.0†)
M01.19* Tuberculous arthritis, unspecified site (A18.0†)
M01.2* Arthritis in Lyme disease (A69.2†)
M01.20* Arthritis in Lyme disease, multiple sites (A69.2†)
M01.21* Arthritis in Lyme disease, shoulder region (A69.2†)
M01.22* Arthritis in Lyme disease, upper arm (A69.2†)
M01.23* Arthritis in Lyme disease, forearm (A69.2†)
M01.24* Arthritis in Lyme disease, hand (A69.2†)
M01.25* Arthritis in Lyme disease, pelvic region and thigh (A69.2†)
M01.26* Arthritis in Lyme disease, lower leg (A69.2†)
M01.27* Arthritis in Lyme disease, ankle and foot (A69.2†)
M01.28* Arthritis in Lyme disease, other site (A69.2†)
M01.29* Arthritis in Lyme disease, unspecified site (A69.2†)
M01.3* Arthritis in other bacterial diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Arthritis in:
    •
     Leprosy [Hansen's disease] (A30.-†)
      •
       localized salmonella infection (A02.2†)
        •
         typhoid or paratyphoid fever (A01.-†)
          Gonococcal arthritis (A54.4†)
M01.30* Arthritis in other bacterial diseases classified elsewhere, multiple sites
M01.31* Arthritis in other bacterial diseases classified elsewhere, shoulder region
M01.32* Arthritis in other bacterial diseases classified elsewhere, upper arm
M01.33* Arthritis in other bacterial diseases classified elsewhere, forearm
M01.34* Arthritis in other bacterial diseases classified elsewhere, hand
M01.35* Arthritis in other bacterial diseases classified elsewhere, pelvic region and thigh
M01.36* Arthritis in other bacterial diseases classified elsewhere, lower leg
M01.37* Arthritis in other bacterial diseases classified elsewhere, ankle and foot
M01.38* Arthritis in other bacterial diseases classified elsewhere, other site
M01.38*
483
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M01.39* 
M01.39*
Arthritis in other bacterial diseases classified elsewhere, unspecified site
M01.4* Rubella arthritis (B06.8†)
M01.40* Rubella arthritis, multiple sites (B06.8†)
M01.41* Rubella arthritis, shoulder region (B06.8†)
M01.42* Rubella arthritis, upper arm (B06.8†)
M01.43* Rubella arthritis, forearm (B06.8†)
M01.44* Rubella arthritis, hand (B06.8†)
M01.45* Rubella arthritis, pelvic region and thigh (B06.8†)
M01.46* Rubella arthritis, lower leg (B06.8†)
M01.47* Rubella arthritis, ankle and foot (B06.8†)
M01.48* Rubella arthritis, other site (B06.8†)
M01.49* Rubella arthritis unspecified site (B06.8†)
M01.5* Arthritis in other viral diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Arthritis in:
    •
     mumps (B26.8†)
      •
       O'nyong-nyong fever (A92.1†)
M01.50* Arthritis in other viral diseases classified elsewhere, multiple sites
M01.51* Arthritis in other viral diseases classified elsewhere, shoulder region
M01.52* Arthritis in other viral diseases classified elsewhere, upper arm
M01.53* Arthritis in other viral diseases classified elsewhere, forearm
M01.54* Arthritis in other viral diseases classified elsewhere, hand
M01.55* Arthritis in other viral diseases classified elsewhere, pelvic region and thigh
M01.56* Arthritis in other viral diseases classified elsewhere, lower leg
M01.57* Arthritis in other viral diseases classified elsewhere, ankle and foot
M01.58* Arthritis in other viral diseases classified elsewhere, other site
M01.59* Arthritis in other viral diseases classified elsewhere, unspecified site
M01.6* Arthritis in mycoses (B35-B49†)
M01.60* Arthritis in mycoses, multiple sites (B35-B49†)
M01.61* Arthritis in mycoses, shoulder region (B35-B49†)
M01.62* Arthritis in mycoses, upper arm (B35-B49†)
M01.63* Arthritis in mycoses, forearm (B35-B49†)
M01.64* Arthritis in mycoses, hand (B35-B49†)
M01.65* Arthritis in mycoses, pelvic region and thigh (B35-B49†)
M01.66* Arthritis in mycoses, lower leg (B35-B49†)
M01.67* Arthritis in mycoses, ankle and foot (B35-B49†)
M01.68* Arthritis in mycoses, other site (B35-B49†)
M01.69* Arthritis in mycoses, unspecified sites (B35-B49†)
M01.8* Arthritis in other infectious and parasitic diseasess classified elsewhere
M01.80* Arthritis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere, multiple sites
M01.81* Arthritis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere, shoulder region
M01.82* Arthritis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere, upper arm
M01.83* Arthritis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere, forearm
M01.84* Arthritis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere, hand
484
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M01.85* Arthritis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere, pelvic region and
       thigh
M01.86* Arthritis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere, lower leg
M01.87* Arthritis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere, ankle and foot
M01.88* Arthritis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere, other site
M01.89* Arthritis in other infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere, unspecified site
M02
M02.28
Reactive arthropathies
Excludes:
Behçet's disease (M35.2)
rheumatic fever (I00)
M02.0 Arthropathy following intestinal bypass
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M02.00 Arthropathy following intestinal bypass, multiple sites
M02.01 Arthropathy following intestinal bypass, shoulder region
M02.02 Arthropathy following intestinal bypass, upper arm
M02.03 Arthropathy following intestinal bypass, forearm
M02.04 Arthropathy following intestinal bypass, hand
M02.05 Arthropathy following intestinal bypass, pelvic region and thigh
M02.06 Arthropathy following intestinal bypass, lower leg
M02.07 Arthropathy following intestinal bypass, ankle and foot
M02.08 Arthropathy following intestinal bypass, other site
M02.09 Arthropathy following intestinal bypass, unspecified site
M02.1 Postdysenteric arthropathy
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M02.10 Postdysenteric arthropathy, multiple sites
M02.11 Postdysenteric arthropathy, shoulder region
M02.12 Postdysenteric arthropathy, upper arm
M02.13 Postdysenteric arthropathy, forearm
M02.14 Postdysenteric arthropathy, hand
M02.15 Postdysenteric arthropathy, pelvic region and thigh
M02.16 Postdysenteric arthropathy, lower leg
M02.17 Postdysenteric arthropathy, ankle and foot
M02.18 Postdysenteric arthropathy, other site
M02.19 Postdysenteric arthropathy, unspecified site
M02.2 Postimmunization arthropathy
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M02.20 Postimmunization arthropathy, multiple sites
M02.21 Postimmunization arthropathy, shoulder region
M02.22 Postimmunization arthropathy, upper arm
M02.23 Postimmunization arthropathy, forearm
M02.24 Postimmunization arthropathy, hand
M02.25 Postimmunization arthropathy, pelvic region and thigh
M02.26 Postimmunization arthropathy, lower leg
M02.27 Postimmunization arthropathy, ankle and foot
M02.28 Postimmunization arthropathy, other site
485
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M02.29 
M02.29
Postimmunization arthropathy, unspecified site
M02.3 Reiter's disease
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M02.30 Reiter's disease, multiple sites
M02.31 Reiter's disease, shoulder region
M02.32 Reiter's disease, upper arm
M02.33 Reiter's disease, forearm
M02.34 Reiter's disease, hand
M02.35 Reiter's disease, pelvic region and thigh
M02.36 Reiter's disease, lower leg
M02.37 Reiter's disease, ankle and foot
M02.38 Reiter's disease, other site
M02.39 Reiter's disease, unspecified site
M02.4o Poststreptococcal reactive arthritis [PSRA]
M02.8 Other reactive arthropathies
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M02.80 Other reactive arthropathies, multiple sites
M02.81 Other reactive arthropathies, shoulder region
M02.82 Other reactive arthropathies, upper arm
M02.83 Other reactive arthropathies, forearm
M02.84 Other reactive arthropathies, hand
M02.85 Other reactive arthropathies, pelvic region and thigh
M02.86 Other reactive arthropathies, lower leg
M02.87 Other reactive arthropathies, ankle and foot
M02.88 Other reactive arthropathies, other site
M02.89 Other reactive arthropathies, unspecified site
M02.9 Reactive arthropathy, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M02.90 Reactive arthropathy, unspecified, multiple sites
M02.91 Reactive arthropathy, unspecified, shoulder region
M02.92 Reactive arthropathy, unspecified, upper arm
M02.93 Reactive arthropathy, unspecified, forearm
M02.94 Reactive arthropathy, unspecified, hand
M02.95 Reactive arthropathy, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M02.96 Reactive arthropathy, unspecified, lower leg
M02.97 Reactive arthropathy, unspecified, ankle and foot
M02.98 Reactive arthropathy unspecified, other site
M02.99 Reactive arthropathy unspecified, unspecified site
M03*
Postinfective and reactive arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere
Excludes:
direct infections of joint in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere (M01.-*)
M03.0* Postmeningococcal arthritis (A39.8†)
        Note:
       (To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13)
      Excludes:
     Meningoccoccal arthritis (M01.0*)
M03.00* Postmeningococcal arthritis, multiple sites (A39.8†)
486
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M03.01* Postmeningococcal arthritis, shoulder region (A39.8†)
M03.02* Postmeningococcal arthritis, upper arm (A39.8†)
M03.03* Postmeningococcal arthritis, forearm (A39.8†)
M03.04* Postmeningococcal arthritis, hand (A39.8†)
M03.05* Postmeningococcal arthritis, pelvic region and thigh (A39.8†)
M03.06* Postmeningococcal arthritis, lower leg (A39.8†)
M03.07* Postmeningococcal arthritis, ankle and foot (A39.8†)
M03.08* Postmeningococcal arthritis, other site (A39.8†)
M03.09* Postmeningococcal arthritis, unspecified site (A39.8†)
M03.1* Postinfective arthropathy in syphilis
      Note:
     [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
    Includes:
   Clutton's joints (A50.5†)
    Excludes:
   Charcot's or tabetic arthropathy (M14.6*)
M03.10* Postinfective arthropathy in syphilis, multiple sites
M03.11* Postinfective arthropathy in syphilis, shoulder region
M03.12* Postinfective arthropathy in syphilis, upper arm
M03.13* Postinfective arthropathy in syphilis, forearm
M03.14* Postinfective arthropathy in syphilis, hand
M03.15* Postinfective arthropathy in syphilis, pelvic region and thigh
M03.16* Postinfective arthropathy in syphilis, lower leg
M03.17* Postinfective arthropathy in syphilis, ankle and foot
M03.18* Postinfective arthropathy in syphilis, other site
M03.19* Postinfective arthropathy in syphilis, unspecified site
M03.2* Other postinfectious arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere
      Note:
     [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
    Includes:
   Postinfectious arthropathy in:
  •
   enteritis due to Yersinia enterocolitica (A04.6†)
    •
     viral hepatitis (B15-B19†)
      Excludes:
     Viral arthropathies (M01.4-M01.5*)
M03.20* Other postinfectious arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere, multiple sites
M03.21* Other postinfectious arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere, shoulder region
M03.22* Other postinfectious arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere, upper arm
M03.23* Other postinfectious arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere, forearm
M03.24* Other postinfectious arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere, hand
M03.25* Other postinfectious arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere, pelvic region and thigh
M03.26* Other postinfectious arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere, lower leg
M03.27* Other postinfectious arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere, ankle and foot
M03.28* Other postinfectious arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere, other site
M03.29* Other postinfectious arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere, unspecified site
M03.6* Reactive arthropathy in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Note:
     [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
    Includes:
   Arthropathy in infective endocarditis (I33.0†)
M03.60* Reactive arthropathy in other diseases classified elsewhere, multiple sites
M03.61* Reactive arthropathy in other diseases classified elsewhere, shoulder region
M03.62* Reactive arthropathy in other diseases classified elsewhere, upper arm
M03.62*
487
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M03.63* 
M03.63*
Reactive arthropathy in other diseases classified elsewhere, forearm
M03.64* Reactive arthropathy in other diseases classified elsewhere, hand
M03.65* Reactive arthropathy in other diseases classified elsewhere, pelvic region and thigh
M03.66* Reactive arthropathy in other diseases classified elsewhere, lower leg
M03.67* Reactive arthropathy in other diseases classified elsewhere, ankle and foot
M03.68* Reactive arthropathy in other diseases classified elsewhere, other site
M03.69* Reactive arthropathy in other diseases classified elsewhere, unspecified site
Inflammatory polyarthropathies
(M05-M14)
M05
Seropositive rheumatoid arthritis
Excludes:
rheumatic fever (I00)
rheumatoid arthritis (of):
•
juvenile (M08.-)
•
spine (M45)
M05.0 Felty's syndrome
     Includes:
    Rheumatoid arthritis with splenoadenomegaly and leukopenia
M05.1† Rheumatoid lung disease (J99.0*)
M05.2 Rheumatoid vasculitis
M05.3† Rheumatoid arthritis with involvement of other organs and systems
        Includes:
       Rheumatoid:
      •
       carditis (I52.8*)
      •
       endocarditis (I39-*)
      •
       mononeuropathy (G59.8*)
      •
       myocarditis (I41.8*)
      •
       myopathy (G73.7*)
      •
       pericarditis (I32.8*)
      •
       polyneuropathy (G63.6*)
M05.8 Other seropositive rheumatoid arthritis
     Includes:
    Other rheumatoid arthritis with rheumatoid factor
M05.9 Seropositive rheumatoid arthritis, unspecified site
     Includes:
    Rheumatoid arthritis with rheumatoid factor NOS
M06
Other rheumatoid arthritis
M06.0 Seronegative rheumatoid arthritis
     Includes:
    Rheumatoid arthritis stated without rheumatoid factor
M06.1 Adult-onset Still's disease
     Excludes:
    Still's disease NOS (M08.2)
M06.2 Rheumatoid bursitis
M06.3 Rheumatoid nodule
M06.4 Inflammatory polyarthropathy
     Excludes:
    polyarthritis NOS (M13.0)
M06.8 Other specified rheumatoid arthritis
M06.9 Rheumatoid arthritis, unspecified
M07*
Psoriatic and enteropathic arthropathies
Excludes:
M07.0*
488
juvenile psoriatic and enteropathic arthropathies (M09.-*)
Distal interphalangeal psoriatic arthropathy (L40.5†)
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M07.1* Arthritis mutilans (L40.5†)
M07.2* Psoriatic spondylitis (L40.5†)
M07.3* Other psoriatic arthropathies (L40.5†)
M07.4* Arthropathy in Crohn's disease [regional enteritis] (K50.-†)
M07.5* Arthropathy in ulcerative colitis (K51.-†)
M07.6* Other enteropathic arthropathies
M08
M10.09
Juvenile arthritis
Includes:
Excludes:
arthritis in children, with onset before 16th birthday and lasting longer than 3 months
Felty's syndrome (M05.0)
juvenile dermatomyositis (M33.0)
M08.0 Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
     Includes:
    Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis with or without rheumatoid factor
M08.1 Juvenile ankylosing spondylitis
     Excludes:
    Ankylosing spondylitis in adults (M45)
M08.2 Juvenile arthritis with systemic onset
     Includes:
    Still's disease NOS
   Excludes:
  adult-onset Still's disease (M06.1)
M08.3 Juvenile polyarthritis (seronegative)
     Includes:
    Chronic juvenile polyarthritis
M08.4 Pauciarticular juvenile arthritis
M08.8 Other juvenile arthritis
M08.9 Juvenile arthritis, unspecified site
M09*
Juvenile arthritis in diseases classified elsewhere
Excludes:
arthropathy in Whipple's disease (M14.8*)
M09.0* Juvenile arthritis in psoriasis (L40.5†)
M09.1* Juvenile arthritis in Crohn's disease [regional enteritis] (K50.-†)
M09.2* Juvenile arthritis in ulcerative colitis (K51.-†)
M09.8* Juvenile arthritis in other diseases classified elsewhere
M10
Gout
M10.0 Idiopathic gout
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Gouty bursitis
 Primary gout
Urate tophus of heart (I43.8*)
M10.00 Idiopathic gout, multiple sites
M10.01 Idiopathic gout, shoulder region
M10.02 Idiopathic gout, upper arm
M10.03 Idiopathic gout, forearm
M10.04 Idiopathic gout, hand
M10.05 Idiopathic gout, pelvic region and thigh
M10.06 Idiopathic gout, lower leg
M10.07 Idiopathic gout, ankle and foot
M10.08 Idiopathic gout, other site
M10.09 Idiopathic gout, unspecified site
489
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M10.1 
M10.1
Lead-induced gout
Note:
[To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M10.10 Lead-induced gout, multiple sites
M10.11 Lead-induced gout, shoulder region
M10.12 Lead-induced gout, upper arm
M10.13 Lead-induced gout, forearm
M10.14 Lead-induced gout, hand
M10.15 Lead-induced gout, pelvic region and thigh
M10.16 Lead-induced gout, lower leg
M10.17 Lead-induced gout, ankle and foot
M10.18 Lead-induced gout, other site
M10.19 Lead-induced gout, unspecified site
M10.2 Drug-induced gout
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
M10.20 Drug-induced gout, multiple sites
M10.21 Drug-induced gout, shoulder region
M10.22 Drug-induced gout, upper arm
M10.23 Drug-induced gout, forearm
M10.24 Drug-induced gout, hand
M10.25 Drug-induced gout, pelvic region and thigh
M10.26 Drug-induced gout, lower leg
M10.27 Drug-induced gout, ankle and foot
M10.28 Drug-induced gout, other site
M10.29 Drug-induced gout, unspecified site
M10.3 Gout due to impairment of renal function
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Use additional code to identify impairment of kidney function (N17-N19)
M10.30 Gout due to impairment of renal function, multiple sites
M10.31 Gout due to impairment of renal function, shoulder region
M10.32 Gout due to impairment of renal function, upper arm
M10.33 Gout due to impairment of renal function, forearm
M10.34 Gout due to impairment of renal function, hand
M10.35 Gout due to impairment of renal function, pelvic region and thigh
M10.36 Gout due to impairment of renal function, lower leg
M10.37 Gout due to impairment of renal function, ankle and foot
M10.38 Gout due to impairment of renal function, other site
M10.39 Gout due to impairment of renal function, unspecified site
M10.4 Other secondary gout
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M10.40 Other secondary gout, multiple sites
M10.41 Other secondary gout, shoulder region
M10.42 Other secondary gout, upper arm
M10.43 Other secondary gout, forearm
490
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M10.44 Other secondary gout, hand
M10.45 Other secondary gout, pelvic region and thigh
M10.46 Other secondary gout, lower leg
M10.47 Other secondary gout, ankle and foot
M10.48 Other secondary gout, other site
M10.49 Other secondary gout, unspecified site
M10.9 Gout, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M10.90 Gout, unspecified, multiple sites
M10.91 Gout, unspecified, shoulder region
M10.92 Gout, unspecified, upper arm
M10.93 Gout, unspecified, forearm
M10.94 Gout, unspecified, hand
M10.95 Gout, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M10.96 Gout, unspecified, lower leg
M10.97 Gout, unspecified, ankle and foot
M10.98 Gout, unspecified, other site
M10.99 Gout, unspecified, unspecified site
M11
M11.19
Other crystal arthropathies
M11.0 Hydroxyapatite deposition disease
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M11.00 Hydroxyapatite deposition disease, multiple sites
M11.01 Hydroxyapatite deposition disease, shoulder region
M11.02 Hydroxyapatite deposition disease, upper arm
M11.03 Hydroxyapatite deposition disease, forearm
M11.04 Hydroxyapatite deposition disease, hand
M11.05 Hydroxyapatite deposition disease, pelvic region and thigh
M11.06 Hydroxyapatite deposition disease, lower leg
M11.07 Hydroxyapatite deposition disease, ankle and foot
M11.08 Hydroxyapatite deposition disease, other site
M11.09 Hydroxyapatite deposition disease, unspecified site
M11.1 Familial chondrocalcinosis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M11.10 Familial chondrocalcinosis, multiple sites
M11.11 Familial chondrocalcinosis, shoulder region
M11.12 Familial chondrocalcinosis, upper arm
M11.13 Familial chondrocalcinosis, forearm
M11.14 Familial chondrocalcinosis, hand
M11.15 Familial chondrocalcinosis, pelvic region and thigh
M11.16 Familial chondrocalcinosis, lower leg
M11.17 Familial chondrocalcinosis, ankle and foot
M11.18 Familial chondrocalcinosis, other site
M11.19 Familial chondrocalcinosis, unspecified site
491
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M11.2 Other chondrocalcinosis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Chondrocalcinosis NOS
M11.20 Other chondrocalcinosis, multiple sites
M11.21 Other chondrocalcinosis, shoulder region
M11.22 Other chondrocalcinosis, upper arm
M11.23 Other chondrocalcinosis, forearm
M11.24 Other chondrocalcinosis, hand
M11.25 Other chondrocalcinosis, pelvic region and thigh
M11.26 Other chondrocalcinosis, lower leg
M11.27 Other chondrocalcinosis, ankle and foot
M11.28 Other chondrocalcinosis, other site
M11.29 Other chondrocalcinosis, unspecified site
M11.8 Other specified crystal arthropathies
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M11.80 Other specified crystal arthropathies, multiple sites
M11.81 Other specified crystal arthropathies, shoulder region
M11.82 Other specified crystal arthropathies, upper arm
M11.83 Other specified crystal arthropathies, forearm
M11.84 Other specified crystal arthropathies, hand
M11.85 Other specified crystal arthropathies, pelvic region and thigh
M11.86 Other specified crystal arthropathies, lower leg
M11.87 Other specified crystal arthropathies, ankle and foot
M11.88 Other specified crystal arthropathies, other site
M11.89 Other specified crystal arthropathies, unspecified site
M11.9 Crystal arthropathy, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M11.90 Crystal arthropathy, unspecified, multiple sites
M11.91 Crystal arthropathy, unspecified, shoulder region
M11.92 Crystal arthropathy, unspecified, upper arm
M11.93 Crystal arthropathy, unspecified, forearm
M11.94 Crystal arthropathy, unspecified, hand
M11.95 Crystal arthropathy, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M11.96 Crystal arthropathy, unspecified, lower leg
M11.97 Crystal arthropathy, unspecified, ankle and foot
M11.98 Crystal arthropathy, unspecified, other site
M11.99 Crystal arthropathy, unspecified, unspecified site
M11.2
M12
Other specific arthropathies
Excludes:
arthropathy NOS (M13.9)
arthrosis (M15-M19)
cricoarytenoid arthropathy (J38.7)
M12.0 Chronic postrheumatic arthropathy [Jaccoud]
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M12.00 Chronic postrheumatic arthropathy [Jaccoud], multiple sites
492
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M12.01 Chronic postrheumatic arthropathy [Jaccoud], shoulder region
M12.02 Chronic postrheumatic arthropathy [Jaccoud], upper arm
M12.03 Chronic postrheumatic arthropathy [Jaccoud], forearm
M12.04 Chronic postrheumatic arthropathy [Jaccoud], hand
M12.05 Chronic postrheumatic arthropathy [Jaccoud], pelvic region and thigh
M12.06 Chronic postrheumatic arthropathy [Jaccoud], lower leg
M12.07 Chronic postrheumatic arthropathy [Jaccoud], ankle and foot
M12.08 Chronic postrheumatic arthropathy [Jaccoud], other site
M12.09 Chronic postrheumatic arthropathy [Jaccoud], unspecified site
M12.1 Kaschin-Beck disease
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M12.10 Kaschin-Beck disease, multiple sites
M12.11 Kaschin-Beck disease, shoulder region
M12.12 Kaschin-Beck disease, upper arm
M12.13 Kaschin-Beck disease, forearm
M12.14 Kaschin-Beck disease, hand
M12.15 Kaschin-Beck disease, pelvic region and thigh
M12.16 Kaschin-Beck disease, lower leg
M12.17 Kaschin-Beck disease, ankle and foot
M12.18 Kaschin-Beck disease, other site
M12.19 Kaschin-Beck disease, unspecified site
M12.2 Villonodular synovitis (pigmented)
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M12.20 Villonodular synovitis (pigmented), multiple sites
M12.21 Villonodular synovitis (pigmented), shoulder region
M12.22 Villonodular synovitis (pigmented), upper arm
M12.23 Villonodular synovitis (pigmented), forearm
M12.24 Villonodular synovitis (pigmented), hand
M12.25 Villonodular synovitis (pigmented), pelvic region and thigh
M12.26 Villonodular synovitis (pigmented), lower leg
M12.27 Villonodular synovitis (pigmented), ankle and foot
M12.28 Villonodular synovitis (pigmented), other site
M12.29 Villonodular synovitis (pigmented), unspecified site
M12.3 Palindromic rheumatism
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M12.30 Palindromic rheumatism, multiple sites
M12.31 Palindromic rheumatism, shoulder region
M12.32 Palindromic rheumatism, upper arm
M12.33 Palindromic rheumatism, forearm
M12.34 Palindromic rheumatism, hand
M12.35 Palindromic rheumatism, pelvic region and thigh
M12.36 Palindromic rheumatism, lower leg
M12.37 Palindromic rheumatism, ankle and foot
M12.38 Palindromic rheumatism, other site
M12.38
493
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M12.39 
M12.39
Palindromic rheumatism, unspecified site
M12.4 Intermittent hydrarthrosis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Intermittent joint effusions
M12.40 Intermittent hydrarthrosis, multiple sites
M12.41 Intermittent hydrarthrosis, shoulder region
M12.42 Intermittent hydrarthrosis, upper arm
M12.43 Intermittent hydrarthrosis, forearm
M12.44 Intermittent hydrarthrosis, hand
M12.45 Intermittent hydrarthrosis, pelvic region and thigh
M12.46 Intermittent hydrarthrosis, lower leg
M12.47 Intermittent hydrarthrosis, ankle and foot
M12.48 Intermittent hydrarthrosis, other site
M12.49 Intermittent hydrarthrosis, unspecified site
M12.5 Traumatic arthropathy
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  post-traumatic arthrosis (of):
 •
  NOS (M19.1)
 •
  first carpometacarpal joint (M18.2-M18.3)
 •
  hip (M16.4-M16.5)
 •
  knee (M17.2-M17.3)
 •
  other single joints (M19.1)
M12.50 Traumatic arthropathy, multiple sites
M12.51 Traumatic arthropathy, shoulder region
M12.52 Traumatic arthropathy, upper arm
M12.53 Traumatic arthropathy, forearm
M12.54 Traumatic arthropathy, hand
M12.55 Traumatic arthropathy, pelvic region and thigh
M12.56 Traumatic arthropathy, lower leg
M12.57 Traumatic arthropathy, ankle and foot
M12.58 Traumatic arthropathy, other site
M12.59 Traumatic arthropathy, unspecified site
M12.8 Other specific arthropathies, not elsewhere classified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Transient arthropathy
M12.80 Other specific arthropathies, not elsewhere classified, multiple sites
M12.81 Other specific arthropathies, not elsewhere classified, shoulder region
M12.82 Other specific arthropathies, not elsewhere classified, upper arm
M12.83 Other specific arthropathies, not elsewhere classified, forearm
M12.84 Other specific arthropathies, not elsewhere classified, hand
M12.85 Other specific arthropathies, not elsewhere classified, pelvic region and thigh
M12.86 Other specific arthropathies, not elsewhere classified, lower leg
M12.87 Other specific arthropathies, not elsewhere classified, ankle and foot
M12.88 Other specific arthropathies, not elsewhere classified, other site
M12.89 Other specific arthropathies, not elsewhere classified, unspecified site
494
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M13
Other arthritis
Excludes:
arthrosis (M15-M19)
M13.0 M13.1 Monoarthritis, not elsewhere classified
           Note:
          [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M13.11 Monoarthritis, not elsewhere classified, shoulder region
M13.12 Monoarthritis, not elsewhere classified, upper arm
M13.13 Monoarthritis, not elsewhere classified, forearm
M13.14 Monoarthritis, not elsewhere classified, hand
M13.15 Monoarthritis, not elsewhere classified, pelvic region and thigh
M13.16 Monoarthritis, not elsewhere classified, lower leg
M13.17 Monoarthritis, not elsewhere classified, ankle and foot
M13.18 Monoarthritis, not elsewhere classified, other site
M13.19 Monoarthritis, not elsewhere classified, unspecified site
M13.8 Other specified arthritis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Allergic arthritis
M13.80 Other specified arthritis, multiple sites
M13.81 Other specified arthritis, shoulder region
M13.82 Other specified arthritis, upper arm
M13.83 Other specified arthritis, forearm
M13.84 Other specified arthritis, hand
M13.85 Other specified arthritis, pelvic region and thigh
M13.86 Other specified arthritis, lower leg
M13.87 Other specified arthritis, ankle and foot
M13.88 Other specified arthritis, other site
M13.89 Other specified arthritis, unspecified site
M13.9 Arthritis, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Arthropathy NOS
M13.90 Arthritis, unspecified, multiple sites
M13.91 Arthritis, unspecified, shoulder region
M13.92 Arthritis, unspecified, upper arm
M13.93 Arthritis, unspecified, forearm
M13.94 Arthritis, unspecified, hand
M13.95 Arthritis, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M13.96 Arthritis, unspecified, lower leg
M13.97 Arthritis, unspecified, ankle and foot
M13.98 Arthritis, unspecified, other site
M13.99 
M13.99
Polyarthritis, unspecified
Excludes:
inflammatory polyarthropathy (M06.4)
Arthritis, unspecified, unspecified site
495
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M14*
Arthropathies in other diseases classified elsewhere
Excludes:
M14*
arthropathy in:
•
haematological disorders (M36.2- M36.3*)
•
hypersensitivity reactions (M36.4*)
•
neoplastic disease (M36.1*)
neuropathic spondylopathy (M49.4*)
psoriatic and enteropathic arthropathies (M07.-*):
•
juvenile (M09.-*)
M14.0* Gouty arthropathy due to enzyme defects and other inherited disorders
      Includes:
     Gouty arthropathy in:
    •
     Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (E79.1†)
      •
       sickle-cell disorders (D57.-†)
M14.1* Crystal arthropathy in other metabolic disorders
      Includes:
     Crystal arthropathy in hyperparathyroidism (E21.-†)
M14.2* Diabetic arthropathy (E10-E14† with common fourth and fifth characters .60)
        Excludes:
       diabetic neuropathic arthropathy (M14.6*)
M14.3* Lipoid dermatoarthritis (E78.8†)
M14.4* Arthropathy in amyloidosis (E85.-†)
M14.5* Arthropathies in other endocrine, nutritional and metabolic disorders
      Includes:
     Arthropathy in:
    •
     acromegaly and pituitary gigantism (E22.0†)
      •
       haemochromatosis (E83.1†)
        •
         hypothyroidism (E00-E03†)
          •
           thyrotoxicosis [hyperthyroidism] (E05.-†)
M14.6* Neuropathic arthropathy
      Includes:
     Charcot's or tabetic arthropathy (A52.1†)
      Diabetic neuropathic arthropathy (E10-E14† with common fourth character .6)
M14.8* Arthropathies in other specified diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Arthropathy in:
    •
     erythema:
    •
     multiforme (L51.-†)
      •
       nodosum (L52†)
        •
         sarcoidosis (D86.8†)
          •
           Whipple's disease (K90.8†)
Arthrosis
(M15-M19)
Note:
Excludes:
M15
In this block the term osteoarthritis is used as a synonym for arthrosis or osteoarthrosis. The term primary has
been used with its customary clinical meaning of no underlying or determining condition identified.
osteoarthritis of spine (M47.-)
Polyarthrosis
Includes:
Excludes:
arthrosis with mention of more than one site
bilateral involvement of single joint (M16-M19)
M15.0 Primary generalized (osteo)arthrosis
M15.1 Heberden's nodes (with arthropathy)
M15.2 Bouchard's nodes (with arthropathy)
M15.3 Secondary multiple arthrosis
     Includes:
    Post-traumatic polyarthrosis
M15.4 Erosive (osteo)arthrosis
M15.8 Other polyarthrosis
496
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M15.9
M16
Polyarthrosis, unspecified
Includes:
Generalized osteoarthritis NOS
M18.2
Coxarthrosis [arthrosis of hip]
M16.0 Primary coxarthrosis, bilateral
M16.1 Other primary coxarthrosis
     Includes:
    Primary coxarthrosis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    unilateral
M16.2 Coxarthrosis resulting from dysplasia, bilateral
M16.3 Other dysplastic coxarthrosis
     Includes:
    Dysplastic coxarthrosis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    unilateral
M16.4 Post-traumatic coxarthrosis, bilateral
M16.5 Other post-traumatic coxarthrosis
     Includes:
    Post-traumatic coxarthrosis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    unilateral
M16.6 Other secondary coxarthrosis, bilateral
M16.7 Other secondary coxarthrosis
     Includes:
    Secondary coxarthrosis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    unilateral
M16.9 Coxarthrosis, unspecified
M17
Gonarthrosis [arthrosis of knee]
M17.0 Primary gonarthrosis, bilateral
M17.1 Other primary gonarthrosis
     Includes:
    Primary gonarthrosis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    unilateral
M17.2 Post-traumatic gonarthrosis, bilateral
M17.3 Other post-traumatic gonarthrosis
     Includes:
    Post-traumatic gonarthrosis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    unilateral
M17.4 Other secondary gonarthrosis, bilateral
M17.5 Other secondary gonarthrosis
     Includes:
    Secondary gonarthrosis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    unilateral
M17.9 Gonarthrosis, unspecified
M18
Arthrosis of first carpometacarpal joint
M18.0 Primary arthrosis of first carpometacarpal joints, bilateral
M18.1 Other primary arthrosis of first carpometacarpal joint
     Includes:
    Primary arthrosis of first carpometacarpal joint:
   •
    NOS
   •
    unilateral
M18.2 Post-traumatic arthrosis of first carpometacarpal joints, bilateral
497
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M18.3 Other post-traumatic arthrosis of first carpometacarpal joint
     Includes:
    Post-traumatic arthrosis of first carpometacarpal joint:
   •
    NOS
   •
    unilateral
M18.4 Other secondary arthrosis of first carpometacarpal joints, bilateral
M18.5 Other secondary arthrosis of first carpometacarpal joint
     Includes:
    Secondary arthrosis of first carpometacarpal joint:
   •
    NOS
   •
    unilateral
M18.9 Arthrosis of first carpometacarpal joint, unspecified
M18.3
M19
Other arthrosis
Excludes:
arthrosis of spine (M47.-)
hallux rigidus (M20.2)
polyarthrosis (M15.-)
M19.0 Primary arthrosis of other joints
M19.1 Post-traumatic arthrosis of other joints
M19.2 Other secondary arthrosis
M19.8 Other specified arthrosis
M19.9 Arthrosis, unspecified
Other joint disorders
(M20-M25)
Excludes:
M20
joints of the spine (M40-M54)
Acquired deformities of fingers and toes
Excludes:
acquired absence of fingers and toes (Z89.-)
congenital:
•
absence of:
•
fingers (Q71.3)
•
toes (Q72.3)
•
deformities and malformations of fingers and toes (Q66.-)(Q68-Q70)(Q74.-)
M20.0 Deformity of finger(s)
     Includes:
    Boutonnière and swan-neck deformities
    Excludes:
   clubbing of fingers (R68.3)
  palmar fascial fibromatosis [Dupuytren] (M72.0)
 trigger finger (M65.3)
M20.1 Hallux valgus (acquired)
     Includes:
    Bunion
M20.2 Hallux rigidus
M20.3 Other deformity of hallux (acquired)
     Includes:
    Hallux varus
M20.4 Other hammer toe(s) (acquired)
M20.5 Other deformities of toe(s) (acquired)
M20.6 Acquired deformity of toe(s), unspecified
498
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M21
Other acquired deformities of limbs
Excludes:
acquired:
•
absence of limb (Z89.-)
•
deformities of fingers or toes (M20.-)
congenital:
•
absence of limbs (Q71-Q73)
•
deformities and malformations of limbs (Q65-Q66)(Q68-Q74)
coxa plana (M91.2)
M21.0 Valgus deformity, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    metatarsus valgus (Q66.6)
   talipes calcaneovalgus (Q66.4)
M21.1 Varus deformity, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    metatarsus varus (Q66.2)
   tibia vara (M92.5)
M21.2 Flexion deformity
M21.3 Wrist or foot drop (acquired)
M21.4 Flat foot [pes planus] (acquired)
     Excludes:
    congenital pes planus (Q66.5)
M21.5 Acquired clawhand, clubhand, clawfoot and clubfoot
     Excludes:
    clubfoot, not specified as acquired (Q66.8)
M21.50 Acquired clawhand, clubhand, clawfoot and clubfoot, multiple sites
M21.54 Acquired clawhand, clubhand, clawfoot and clubfoot, hand
M21.57 Acquired clawhand, clubhand, clawfoot and clubfoot, ankle and foot
M21.6 Other acquired deformities of ankle and foot
     Excludes:
    deformities of toe (acquired) (M20.1-M20.6)
M21.7 Unequal limb length (acquired)
M21.8 Other specified acquired deformities of limbs
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M21.80 Other specified acquired deformities of limbs, multiple sites
M21.81 Other specified acquired deformities of limbs, shoulder region
M21.82 Other specified acquired deformities of limbs, upper arm
M21.83 Other specified acquired deformities of limbs, forearm
M21.84 Other specified acquired deformities of limbs, hand
M21.85 Other specified acquired deformities of limbs, pelvic region and thigh
M21.86 Other specified acquired deformities of limbs, lower leg
M21.87 Other specified acquired deformities of limbs, ankle and foot
M21.89 Other specified acquired deformities of limbs, unspecified site
M21.9 
M22.8
Acquired deformity of limb, unspecified
M22
Disorders of patella
Excludes:
dislocation of patella (S83.0-)
M22.0 Recurrent dislocation of patella
M22.1 Recurrent subluxation of patella
M22.2 Patellofemoral disorders
M22.3 Other derangements of patella
M22.4 Chondromalacia patellae
M22.8 Other disorders of patella
499
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M22.9
M22.9
M23
Disorder of patella, unspecified
Internal derangement of knee
Excludes:
ankylosis (M24.6)
current injury - see injury to the knee and lower leg (S80-S89)
deformity of knee (M21.-.-)
disorders of patella (M22)
osteochondritis dissecans (M93.2-)
recurrent dislocation or subluxation (M24.4):
•
patella (M22.0-M22.1)
M23.0 Cystic meniscus
M23.00 Cystic meniscus, multiple sites
M23.01 Cystic anterior horn of medial meniscus
M23.02 Cystic posterior horn of medial meniscus
M23.03 Cystic medial meniscus other and unspecified site
M23.04 Cystic anterior horn of lateral meniscus
M23.05 Cystic posterior horn of lateral meniscus
M23.06 Cystic lateral meniscus other and unspecified site
M23.09 Cystic meniscus, unspecified site
M23.1 Discoid meniscus (congenital)
M23.10 Discoid meniscus (congenital), multiple sites
M23.11 Discoid anterior horn of medial meniscus (congenital)
M23.12 Discoid posterior horn of medial meniscus (congenital)
M23.13 Discoid medial meniscus other and unspecified site (congenital)
M23.14 Discoid anterior horn of lateral meniscus (congenital)
M23.15 Discoid posterior horn of lateral meniscus (congenital)
M23.16 Discoid lateral meniscus (congenital) other and unspecified site
M23.19 Discoid meniscus (congenital) unspecified site
M23.2 Derangement of meniscus due to old tear or injury
     Includes:
    Old bucket-handle tear
M23.20 Derangement of meniscus due to old tear or injury, multiple sites
M23.21 Derangement of anterior horn of medial meniscus due to old tear or injury
M23.22 Derangement of posterior horn of medial meniscus due to old tear or injury
M23.23 Derangement of other and unspecified medial meniscus due to old tear or injury
M23.24 Derangement of anterior horn of lateral meniscus due to old tear or injury
M23.25 Derangement of posterior horn of lateral meniscus due to old tear or injury
M23.26 Derangement of other and unspecified lateral meniscus due to old tear or injury
M23.29 Derangement of unspecified meniscus due to old tear or injury
M23.3 Other meniscus derangements
     Includes:
    Degenerate meniscus
   Detached meniscus
  Retained meniscus
M23.30 Other meniscus derangements, multiple sites
M23.31 Other derangement of anterior horn of medial meniscus
M23.32 Other derangement of posterior horn of medial meniscus
M23.33 Other derangement of other and unspecified medial meniscus
500
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M23.34 Other derangement of anterior horn of lateral meniscus
M23.35 Other derangement of posterior horn of lateral meniscus
M23.36 Other derangement of other and unspecified lateral meniscus
M23.39 Other derangement of unspecified meniscus
M23.4 Loose body in knee
M23.5 Chronic instability of knee
M23.6 Other spontaneous disruption of ligament(s) of knee
M23.60 Other spontaneous disruption of ligament(s) of knee, multiple sites
M23.61 Other spontaneous disruption of anterior cruciate ligament
M23.62 Other spontaneous disruption of posterior cruciate ligament
M23.63 Other spontaneous disruption of medial collateral ligament
M23.64 Other spontaneous disruption of lateral collateral ligament
M23.67 Other spontaneous disruption of capsular ligament
M23.69 Other spontaneous disruption of unspecified ligament(s) of knee
M23.8 Other internal derangements of knee
     Includes:
    Laxity of ligament of knee
   Snapping knee
M23.9 Internal derangement of knee, unspecified
M24
M24.13
Other specific joint derangements
Excludes:
current injury - see injury of joint by body region
ganglion(M67.4)
snapping knee (M23.8)
temporomandibular joint disorders (K07.6-)
M24.0 Loose body in joint
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  Loose body in knee (M23.4)
M24.00 Loose body in joint, multiple sites
M24.01 Loose body in joint, shoulder region
M24.02 Loose body in joint, upper arm
M24.03 Loose body in joint, forearm
M24.04 Loose body in joint, hand
M24.05 Loose body in joint, pelvic region and thigh
M24.07 Loose body in joint, ankle and foot
M24.08 Loose body in joint, other site
M24.09 Loose body in joint, unspecified site
M24.1 Other articular cartilage disorders
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  chondrocalinosis (M11.1- M11.2)
 internal derangement of knee (M23-)
metastatic calcification (E83.5)
ochronosis (E70.2)
M24.10 Other articular cartilage disorders, multiple sites
M24.11 Other articular cartilage disorders, shoulder region
M24.12 Other articular cartilage disorders, upper arm
M24.13 Other articular cartilage disorders, forearm
501
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M24.14 
M24.14
Other articular cartilage disorders, hand
M24.15 Other articular cartilage disorders, pelvic region and thigh
M24.17 Other articular cartilage disorders, ankle and foot
M24.18 Other articular cartilage disorders, other site
M24.19 Other articular cartilage disorders, unspecified site
M24.2 Disorder of ligament
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Instability secondary to old ligament injury
 Ligamentous laxity NOS
Excludes:
familial ligamentous laxity (M35.7)
knee (M23.5 - M23.8)
M24.20 Disorder of ligament, multiple sites
M24.21 Disorder of ligament, shoulder region
M24.22 Disorder of ligament, upper arm
M24.23 Disorder of ligament, forearm
M24.24 Disorder of ligament, hand
M24.25 Disorder of ligament, pelvic region and thigh
M24.27 Disorder of ligament, ankle and foot
M24.28 Disorder of ligament, other site
M24.29 Disorder of ligament, unspecified site
M24.3 Pathological dislocation and subluxation of joint, not elsewhere classified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  dislocation or displacement of joint:
 •
  congenital - see congenital malformations and deformations of the musculoskeletal system (Q65
 - Q79)
•
 current injury - see injury of joints and ligaments by body region
•
 recurrent (M24.4)
M24.30 Pathological dislocation and subluxation of joint, not elsewhere classified, multiple sites
M24.31 Pathological dislocation and subluxation of joint, not elsewhere classified, shoulder region
M24.32 Pathological dislocation and subluxation of joint, not elsewhere classified, upper arm
M24.33 Pathological dislocation and subluxation of joint, not elsewhere classified, forearm
M24.34 Pathological dislocation and subluxation of joint, not elsewhere classified, hand
M24.35 Pathological dislocation and subluxation of joint, not elsewhere classified, pelvic region and
      thigh
M24.36 Pathological dislocation and subluxation of joint, not elsewhere classified, lower leg
M24.37 Pathological dislocation and subluxation of joint, not elsewhere classified, ankle and foot
M24.38 Pathological dislocation and subluxation of joint, not elsewhere classified, other site
M24.39 Pathological dislocation and subluxation of joint, not elsewhere classified, unspecified site
M24.4 Recurrent dislocation and subluxation of joint
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  patella (M22.0-M22.1)
 vertebral subluxation (M43.3-M43.5)
M24.40 Recurrent dislocation and subluxation of joint, multiple sites
M24.41 Recurrent dislocation and subluxation of joint, shoulder region
M24.42 Recurrent dislocation and subluxation of joint, upper arm
M24.43 Recurrent dislocation and subluxation of joint, forearm
M24.44 Recurrent dislocation and subluxation of joint, hand
502
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M24.45 Recurrent dislocation and subluxation of joint, pelvic region and thigh
M24.46 Recurrent dislocation and subluxation of joint, lower leg
M24.47 Recurrent dislocation and subluxation of joint, ankle and foot
M24.48 Recurrent dislocation and subluxation of joint, other site
M24.49 Recurrent dislocation and subluxation of joint, unspecified site
M24.5 Contracture of joint
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  acquired deformities of limbs (M20 -M21)
 contracture of tendon (sheath) without contracture of joint (M67.1)
Dupuytren's contracture (M72.0)
M24.50 Contracture of joint, multiple sites
M24.51 Contracture of joint, shoulder region
M24.52 Contracture of joint, upper arm
M24.53 Contracture of joint, forearm
M24.54 Contracture of joint, hand
M24.55 Contracture of joint, pelvic region and thigh
M24.56 Contracture of joint, lower leg
M24.57 Contracture of joint, ankle and foot
M24.58 Contracture of joint, other site
M24.59 Contracture of joint, unspecified site
M24.6 Ankylosis of joint
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  spine (M43.2)
 stiffness of joint without ankylosis (M25.6)
M24.60 Ankylosis of joint, multiple sites
M24.61 Ankylosis of joint, shoulder region
M24.62 Ankylosis of joint, upper arm
M24.63 Ankylosis of joint, forearm
M24.64 Ankylosis of joint, hand
M24.65 Ankylosis of joint, pelvic region and thigh
M24.66 Ankylosis of joint, lower leg
M24.67 Ankylosis of joint, ankle and foot
M24.68 Ankylosis of joint, other site
M24.69 Ankylosis of joint, unspecified site
M24.7 Protrusio acetabuli
M24.8 Other specific joint derangements, not elsewhere classified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter XIII]
   Excludes:
  that involving iliotibial band syndrome (M76.3)
M24.80 Other specific joint derangements, not elsewhere classified, multiple sites
M24.81 Other specific joint derangements, not elsewhere classified, shoulder region
M24.82 Other specific joint derangements, not elsewhere classified, upper arm
M24.83 Other specific joint derangements, not elsewhere classified, forearm
M24.84 Other specific joint derangements, not elsewhere classified, hand
M24.85 Other specific joint derangements, not elsewhere classified, pelvic region and thigh
M24.86 Other specific joint derangements, not elsewhere classified, lower leg
M24.86
503
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M24.87 
M24.87
Other specific joint derangements, not elsewhere classified, ankle and foot
M24.88 Other specific joint derangements, not elsewhere classified, other site
M24.89 Other specific joint derangements, not elsewhere classified, unspecified site
M24.9 Joint derangement, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter XIII]
M24.90 Joint derangement, unspecified, multiple sites
M24.91 Joint derangement, unspecified, shoulder region
M24.92 Joint derangement, unspecified, upper arm
M24.93 Joint derangement, unspecified, forearm
M24.94 Joint derangement, unspecified, hand
M24.95 Joint derangement, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M24.96 Joint derangement, unspecified, lower leg
M24.97 Joint derangement, unspecified, ankle and foot
M24.98 Joint derangement, unspecified, other site
M24.99 Joint derangement unspecified, unspecified site
M25
Other joint disorders, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
abnormality of gait and mobility (R26.-)
calcification of:
•
bursa (M71.4)
•
shoulder (joint) (M75.3)
•
tendon (M65.2)
deformities classified to M20-M21
difficulty in walking (R26.2)
M25.0 Haemarthrosis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  current injury - see injury of joint by body region
M25.00 Haemarthrosis, multiple sites
M25.01 Haemarthrosis, shoulder region
M25.02 Haemarthrosis, upper arm
M25.03 Haemarthrosis, forearm
M25.04 Haemarthrosis, hand
M25.05 Haemarthrosis, pelvic region and thigh
M25.06 Haemarthrosis, lower leg
M25.07 Haemarthrosis, ankle and foot
M25.08 Haemarthrosis, other site
M25.09 Haemarthrosis, unspecified site
M25.1 Fistula of joint
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M25.10 Fistula of joint, multiple sites
M25.11 Fistula of joint, shoulder region
M25.12 Fistula of joint, upper arm
M25.13 Fistula of joint, forearm
M25.14 Fistula of joint, hand
M25.15 Fistula of joint, pelvic region and thigh
M25.16 Fistula of joint, lower leg
504
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M25.17 Fistula of joint, ankle and foot
M25.18 Fistula of joint, other site
M25.19 Fistula of joint, unspecified site
M25.2 Flail joint
     Note:
M25.5
[To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M25.20 Flail joint, multiple sites
M25.21 Flail joint, shoulder region
M25.22 Flail joint, upper arm
M25.23 Flail joint, forearm
M25.24 Flail joint, hand
M25.25 Flail joint, pelvic region and thigh
M25.26 Flail joint, lower leg
M25.27 Flail joint, ankle and foot
M25.28 Flail joint, other site
M25.29 Flail joint, unspecified site
M25.3 Other instability of joint
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  instability of joint secondary to:
 •
  old ligament injury (M24.2)
 •
  removal of joint prosthesis (M96.8)
M25.30 Other instability of joint, multiple sites
M25.31 Other instability of joint, shoulder region
M25.32 Other instability of joint, upper arm
M25.33 Other instability of joint, forearm
M25.34 Other instability of joint, hand
M25.35 Other instability of joint, pelvic region and thigh
M25.36 Other instability of joint, lower leg
M25.37 Other instability of joint, ankle and foot
M25.38 Other instability of joint, other site
M25.39 Other instability of joint, unspecified site
M25.4 Effusion of joint
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  hydrarthrosis of yaws (A66.6)
M25.40 Effusion of joint, multiple sites
M25.41 Effusion of joint, shoulder region
M25.42 Effusion of joint, upper arm
M25.43 Effusion of joint, forearm
M25.44 Effusion of joint, hand
M25.45 Effusion of joint, pelvic region and thigh
M25.46 Effusion of joint, lower leg
M25.47 Effusion of joint, ankle and foot
M25.48 Effusion of joint, other site
M25.49 Effusion of joint, unspecified site
M25.5 Pain in joint
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
505
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M25.50 
M25.50
Pain in joint, multiple sites
M25.51 Pain in joint, shoulder region
M25.52 Pain in joint, upper arm
M25.53 Pain in joint, forearm
M25.54 Pain in joint, hand
M25.55 Pain in joint, pelvic region and thigh
M25.56 Pain in joint, lower leg
M25.57 Pain in joint, ankle and foot
M25.58 Pain in joint, other site
M25.59 Pain in joint, unspecified site
M25.6 Stiffness of joint, not elsewhere classified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M25.60 Stiffness of joint, not elsewhere classified, multiple sites
M25.61 Stiffness of joint, not elsewhere classified, shoulder region
M25.62 Stiffness of joint, not elsewhere classified, upper arm
M25.63 Stiffness of joint, not elsewhere classified, forearm
M25.64 Stiffness of joint, not elsewhere classified, hand
M25.65 Stiffness of joint, not elsewhere classified, pelvic region and thigh
M25.66 Stiffness of joint, not elsewhere classified, lower leg
M25.67 Stiffness of joint, not elsewhere classified, ankle and foot
M25.68 Stiffness of joint, not elsewhere classified, other site
M25.69 Stiffness of joint, not elsewhere classified, unspecified site
M25.7 Osteophyte
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M25.70 Osteophyte, multiple sites
M25.71 Osteophyte, shoulder region
M25.72 Osteophyte, upper arm
M25.73 Osteophyte, forearm
M25.74 Osteophyte, hand
M25.75 Osteophyte, pelvic region and thigh
M25.76 Osteophyte, lower leg
M25.77 Osteophyte, ankle and foot
M25.78 Osteophyte, other site
M25.79 Osteophyte, unspecified site
M25.8 Other specified joint disorders
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M25.80 Other specified joint disorders, multiple sites
M25.81 Other specified joint disorders, shoulder region
M25.82 Other specified joint disorders, upper arm
M25.83 Other specified joint disorders, forearm
M25.84 Other specified joint disorders, hand
M25.85 Other specified joint disorders, pelvic region and thigh
M25.86 Other specified joint disorders, lower leg
M25.87 Other specified joint disorders, ankle and foot
506
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M25.88 Other specified joint disorders, other site
M25.89 Other specified joint disorders, unspecified site
M25.9 Joint disorder, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M25.90 Joint disorder, unspecified, multiple sites
M25.91 Joint disorder, unspecified, shoulder region
M25.92 Joint disorder, unspecified, upper arm
M25.93 Joint disorder, unspecified, forearm
M25.94 Joint disorder, unspecified, hand
M25.95 Joint disorder, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M25.96 Joint disorder, unspecified, lower leg
M25.97 Joint disorder, unspecified, ankle and foot
M25.98 Joint disorder, unspecified, other site
M25.99 Joint disorder, unspecified, unspecified site
M25.99
507
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M30
Systemic connective tissue disorders
(M30-M36)
Includes:
Excludes:
M30
autoimmune disease:
•
NOS
•
systemic
collagen (vascular) disease:
•
NOS
•
systemic
antiphospholipid syndrome (D68.6)
autoimmune disease, single organ or single cell-type (code to relevant condition category)
Polyarteritis nodosa and related conditions
M30.0 Polyarteritis nodosa
M30.1 Allergic granulomatous angiitis
     Includes:
    Churg-Strauss syndrome [polyarteritis with lung involvement]
M30.2 Juvenile polyarteritis
M30.3 Mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome [Kawasaki]
M30.8 Other conditions related to polyarteritis nodosa
     Includes:
    Polyangiitis overlap syndrome
M31
Other necrotizing vasculopathies
M31.0 Hypersensitivity angiitis
     Includes:
    Goodpasture's syndrome
M31.1 Thrombotic microangiopathy
     Includes:
    Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
M31.2 Lethal midline granuloma
M31.3 Wegener's granulomatosis
     Includes:
    Necrotizing respiratory granulomatosis
M31.4 Aortic arch syndrome [Takayasu]
M31.5 Giant cell arteritis with polymyalgia rheumatica
M31.6 Other giant cell arteritis
M31.7 Microscopic polyangiitis
     Includes:
    Microscopic polyarteritis
   Excludes:
  polyarteritis nodosa (M30.0)
M31.8 Other specified necrotizing vasculopathies
     Includes:
    Hypocomplementaemic vasculitis
M31.9 Necrotizing vasculopathy, unspecified site
M32
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Excludes:
lupus erythematosus (discoid)(NOS) (L93.0)
M32.0 Drug-induced systemic lupus erythematosus
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
M32.1† Systemic lupus erythematosus with organ or system involvement
        Includes:
       Libman-Sacks disease (I39.-*)
      Lupus pericarditis (I32.8*)
     Systemic lupus erythematosus with:
    •
     kidney involvement (N08.5*,N16.4*)
    •
     lung involvement (J99.1*)
M32.8 Other forms of systemic lupus erythematosus
508
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M32.9
M33
Systemic lupus erythematosus, unspecified
Dermatopolymyositis
M33.0 Juvenile dermatomyositis
M33.1 Other dermatomyositis
M33.2 Polymyositis
M33.9 
M35.8
Dermatopolymyositis, unspecified
M34
Systemic sclerosis
Includes:
Excludes:
scleroderma
scleroderma:
•
circumscribed (L94.0)
•
neonatal (P83.8)
M34.0 Progressive systemic sclerosis
M34.1 CR(E)ST syndrome
     Includes:
    Combination of calcinosis, Raynaud's phenomenon, (o)esophageal dysfunction, sclerodactyly,
   telangiectasia.
M34.2 Systemic sclerosis induced by drugs and chemicals
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify cause.
M34.8 Other forms of systemic sclerosis
     Includes:
    Systemic sclerosis with:
   •
    lung involvement† (J99.1*)
     •
      myopathy† (G73.7*)
M34.9 Systemic sclerosis, unspecified
M35
Other systemic involvement of connective tissue
Excludes:
reactive perforating collagenosis (L87.1)
M35.0 Sicca syndrome [Sjögren]
      Includes:
     Sjögren's syndrome with:
     •
      keratoconjunctivitis† (H19.3*)
       •
        lung involvement† (J99.1*)
         •
          myopathy† (G73.7*)
           •
            renal tubulo-interstitial disorders† (N16.4*)
M35.1 Other overlap syndromes
     Includes:
    Mixed connective tissue disease
   Excludes:
  polyangiitis overlap syndrome (M30.8)
M35.2 Behçet's disease
M35.3 Polymyalgia rheumatica
     Excludes:
    polymyalgia rheumatica with giant cell arteritis (M31.5)
M35.4 Diffuse (eosinophilic) fasciitis
M35.5 Multifocal fibrosclerosis
M35.6 Relapsing panniculitis [Weber-Christian]
     Excludes:
    panniculitis:
   •
    NOS (M79.3)
   •
    lupus (L93.2)
M35.7 Hypermobility syndrome
     Includes:
    Familial ligamentous laxity
   Excludes:
  Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (Q79.6)
 ligamentous laxity NOS (M24.2)
M35.8 Other specified systemic involvement of connective tissue
509
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M35.9
M35.9
M36*
Systemic involvement of connective tissue, unspecified site
Includes:
Autoimmune disease (systemic) NOS
Collagen (vascular) disease NOS
Systemic disorders of connective tissue in diseases classified elsewhere
Excludes:
arthropathies in diseases classified elsewhere (M14.-*)
M36.0* Dermato(poly)myositis in neoplastic disease (C00-D48†)
M36.1* Arthropathy in neoplastic disease (C00-D48†)
        Includes:
       Arthropathy in:
      •
       leukaemia (C91-C95†)
        •
         malignant histiocytosis (C96.1†)
          •
           multiple myeloma (C90.0†)
M36.2* Haemophilic arthropathy (D66-D68†)
M36.3* Arthropathy in other blood disorders (D50-D76†)
        Excludes:
       arthropathy in Henoch(-Schönlein) purpura (M36.4*)
M36.4* Arthropathy in hypersensitivity reactions classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Arthropathy in Henoch(-Schönlein) purpura (D69.0†)
M36.8* Systemic disorders of connective tissue in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Systemic disorders of connective tissue in:
    •
     hypogammaglobulinaemia (D80.-†)
      •
       ochronosis (E70.2†)
Dorsopathies
(M40-M54)
Deforming dorsopathies
(M40-M43)
M40
Kyphosis and lordosis
Excludes:
kyphoscoliosis (M41.-)
kyphosis and lordosis:
•
congenital (Q76.4)
•
postprocedural (M96.-)
M40.0 Postural kyphosis
     Excludes:
    osteochondrosis of spine (M42-)
M40.00 Postural kyphosis, multiple sites in spine
M40.02 Postural kyphosis, cervical region
M40.03 Postural kyphosis, cervicothoracic region
M40.04 Postural kyphosis, thoracic region
M40.05 Postural kyphosis, thoracolumbar region
M40.09 Postural kyphosis, unspecified site
M40.1 Other secondary kyphosis
M40.10 Other secondary kyphosis, multiple sites in spine
M40.12 Other secondary kyphosis, cervical region
M40.13 Other secondary kyphosis, cervicothoracic region
M40.14 Other secondary kyphosis, thoracic region
M40.15 Other secondary kyphosis, thoracolumbar region
M40.19 Other secondary kyphosis, unspecified site
510
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M40.2 Other and unspecified kyphosis
M40.20 Other and unspecified kyphosis, multiple sites in spine
M40.22 Other and unspecified kyphosis, cervical region
M40.23 Other and unspecified kyphosis, cervicothoracic region
M40.24 Other and unspecified kyphosis, thoracic region
M40.25 Other and unspecified kyphosis, thoracolumbar region
M40.29 Other and unspecified kyphosis, unspecified site
M40.3 Flatback syndrome
M40.30 Flatback syndrome, multiple sites in spine
M40.32 Flatback syndrome, cervical region
M40.34 Flatback syndrome, thoracic region
M40.36 Flatback syndrome, lumbar region
M40.39 Flatback syndrome, unspecified site
M40.4 Other lordosis
     Includes:
    Lordosis:
   •
    acquired
   •
    postural
M40.40 Other lordosis, multiple sites in spine
M40.45 Other lordosis, thoracolumbar region
M40.46 Other lordosis, lumbar region
M40.47 Other lordosis, lumbosacral region
M40.49 Other lordosis, unspecified site
M40.5 Lordosis, unspecified
M40.52 Lordosis, unspecified, cervical region
M40.54 Lordosis, unspecified, thoracic region
M40.55 Lordosis, unspecified, thoracolumbar region
M40.56 Lordosis, unspecified, lumbar region
M40.57 Lordosis, unspecified, lumbosacral region
M40.59 Lordosis, unspecified, unspecified site
M41
M41.09
Scoliosis
Includes:
Excludes:
kyphoscoliosis
congenital scoliosis:
•
NOS (Q67.5)
•
due to bony malformation (Q76.3)
•
postural (Q67.5)
kyphoscoliotic heart disease (I27.1)
postprocedural (M96.-)
M41.0 Infantile idiopathic scoliosis
M41.00 Infantile idiopathic scoliosis, multiple sites in spine
M41.02 Infantile idiopathic scoliosis, cervical region
M41.03 Infantile idiopathic scoliosis, cervicothoracic region
M41.04 Infantile idiopathic scoliosis, thoracic region
M41.05 Infantile idiopathic scoliosis, thoracolumbar region
M41.06 Infantile idiopathic scoliosis, lumbar region
M41.07 Infantile idiopathic scoliosis, lumbosacral region
M41.09 Infantile idiopathic scoliosis, unspecified site
511
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M41.1 
M41.1
Juvenile idiopathic scoliosis
Includes:
Adolescent scoliosis
M41.10 Juvenile idiopathic scoliosis, multiple sites in spine
M41.12 Juvenile idiopathic scoliosis, cervical region
M41.13 Juvenile idiopathic scoliosis, cervicothoracic region
M41.14 Juvenile idiopathic scoliosis, thoracic region
M41.15 Juvenile idiopathic scoliosis, thoracolumbar region
M41.16 Juvenile idiopathic scoliosis, lumbar region
M41.17 Juvenile idiopathic scoliosis, lumbosacral region
M41.19 Juvenile idiopathic scoliosis, unspecified site
M41.2 Other idiopathic scoliosis
M41.20 Other idiopathic scoliosis, multiple sites in spine
M41.22 Other idiopathic scoliosis, cervical region
M41.23 Other idiopathic scoliosis, cervicothoracic region
M41.24 Other idiopathic scoliosis, thoracic region
M41.25 Other idiopathic scoliosis, thoracolumbar region
M41.26 Other idiopathic scoliosis, lumbar region
M41.27 Other idiopathic scoliosis, lumbosacral region
M41.29 Other idiopathic scoliosis, unspecified site
M41.3 Thoracogenic scoliosis
M41.30 Thoracogenic scoliosis, multiple sites in spine
M41.32 Thoracogenic scoliosis, cervical region
M41.33 Thoracogenic scoliosis, cervicothoracic region
M41.34 Thoracogenic scoliosis, thoracic region
M41.35 Thoracogenic scoliosis, thoracolumbar region
M41.36 Thoracogenic scoliosis, lumbar region
M41.37 Thoracogenic scoliosis, lumbosacral region
M41.39 Thoracogenic scoliosis, unspecified site
M41.4 Neuromuscular scoliosis
     Includes:
    Scoliosis secondary to cerebral palsy, Friedreich's ataxia, poliomyelitis and other neuromuscular
   disorders
M41.40 Neuromuscular scoliosis, multiple sites in spine
M41.42 Neuromuscular scoliosis, cervical region
M41.43 Neuromuscular scoliosis, cervicothoracic region
M41.44 Neuromuscular scoliosis, thoracic region
M41.45 Neuromuscular scoliosis, thoracolumbar region
M41.46 Neuromuscular scoliosis, lumbar region
M41.47 Neuromuscular scoliosis, lumbosacral region
M41.49 Neuromuscular scoliosis, unspecified site
M41.5 Other secondary scoliosis
M41.50 Other secondary scoliosis, multiple sites in spine
M41.52 Other secondary scoliosis, cervical region
M41.53 Other secondary scoliosis, cervicothoracic region
M41.54 Other secondary scoliosis, thoracic region
512
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M41.55 Other secondary scoliosis, thoracolumbar region
M41.56 Other secondary scoliosis, lumbar region
M41.57 Other secondary scoliosis, lumbosacral region
M41.59 Other secondary scoliosis, unspecified site
M41.8 Other forms of scoliosis
M41.80 Other forms of scoliosis, multiple sites in spine
M41.82 Other forms of scoliosis, cervical region
M41.83 Other forms of scoliosis, cervicothoracic region
M41.84 Other forms of scoliosis, thoracic region
M41.85 Other forms of scoliosis, thoracolumbar region
M41.86 Other forms of scoliosis, lumbar region
M41.87 Other forms of scoliosis, lumbosacral region
M41.89 Other forms of scoliosis, unspecified site
M41.9 Scoliosis, unspecified
M41.90 Scoliosis, unspecified, multiple sites in spine
M41.92 Scoliosis, unspecified, cervical region
M41.93 Scoliosis, unspecified, cervicothoracic region
M41.94 Scoliosis, unspecified, thoracic region
M41.95 Scoliosis, unspecified, thoracolumbar region
M41.96 Scoliosis, unspecified, lumbar region
M41.97 Scoliosis, unspecified, lumbosacral region
M41.99 Scoliosis unspecified, unspecified site
M42
M42.14
Spinal osteochondrosis
M42.0 Juvenile osteochondrosis of spine
     Includes:
    Calvé's disease
    Scheuermann's disease
   Excludes:
  postural kyphosis (M40.0)
M42.00 Juvenile osteochondrosis of spine, multiple sites in spine
M42.01 Juvenile osteochondrosis of spine, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M42.02 Juvenile osteochondrosis of spine, cervical region
M42.03 Juvenile osteochondrosis of spine, cervicothoracic region
M42.04 Juvenile osteochondrosis of spine, thoracic region
M42.05 Juvenile osteochondrosis of spine, thoracolumbar region
M42.06 Juvenile osteochondrosis of spine, lumbar region
M42.07 Juvenile osteochondrosis of spine, lumbosacral region
M42.08 Juvenile osteochondrosis of spine, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M42.09 Juvenile osteochondrosis of spine, unspecified site
M42.1 Adult osteochondrosis of spine
M42.10 Adult osteochondrosis of spine, multiple sites in spine
M42.11 Adult osteochondrosis of spine, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M42.12 Adult osteochondrosis of spine, cervical region
M42.13 Adult osteochondrosis of spine, cervicothoracic region
M42.14 Adult osteochondrosis of spine, thoracic region
513
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M42.15 
M42.15
Adult osteochondrosis of spine, thoracolumbar region
M42.16 Adult osteochondrosis of spine, lumbar region
M42.17 Adult osteochondrosis of spine, lumbosacral region
M42.18 Adult osteochondrosis of spine, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M42.19 Adult osteochondrosis of spine, unspecified site
M42.9 Spinal osteochondrosis, unspecified
M42.90 Spinal osteochondrosis, unspecified, multiple sites in spine
M42.91 Spinal osteochondrosis, unspecified, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M42.92 Spinal osteochondrosis, unspecified, cervical region
M42.93 Spinal osteochondrosis, unspecified, cervicothoracic region
M42.94 Spinal osteochondrosis, unspecified, thoracic region
M42.95 Spinal osteochondrosis, unspecified, thoracolumbar region
M42.96 Spinal osteochondrosis, unspecified, lumbar region
M42.97 Spinal osteochondrosis, unspecified, lumbosacral region
M42.98 Spinal osteochondrosis unspecified, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M42.99 Spinal osteochondrosis unspecified, unspecified site
M43
Other deforming dorsopathies
Excludes:
congenital spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis (Q76.2-)
hemivertebra (Q76.3-Q76.4)
Klippel-Feil syndrome (Q76.1)
lumbarization and sacralization (Q76.4)
platyspondylisis (Q76.4)
spina bifida occulta (Q76.0)
spinal curvature in:
•
osteoporosis (M80-M81)
•
Paget's disease of bone [osteitis deformans] (M88.-)
M43.0 Spondylolysis
M43.00 Spondylolysis, multiple sites in spine
M43.01 Spondylolysis, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M43.02 Spondylolysis, cervical region
M43.03 Spondylolysis, cervicothoracic region
M43.04 Spondylolysis, thoracic region
M43.05 Spondylolysis, thoracolumbar region
M43.06 Spondylolysis, lumbar region
M43.07 Spondylolysis, lumbosacral region
M43.08 Spondylolysis, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M43.09 Spondylolysis, unspecified site
M43.1 Spondylolisthesis
M43.10 Spondylolisthesis, multiple sites in spine
M43.11 Spondylolisthesis, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M43.12 Spondylolisthesis, cervical region
M43.13 Spondylolisthesis, cervicothoracic region
M43.14 Spondylolisthesis, thoracic region
M43.15 Spondylolisthesis, thoracolumbar region
M43.16 Spondylolisthesis, lumbar region
514
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M43.17 Spondylolisthesis, lumbosacral region
M43.18 Spondylolisthesis, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M43.19 Spondylolisthesis, unspecified site
M43.2 Other fusion of spine
     Includes:
    Ankylosis of spinal joint
   Excludes:
  ankylosing spondylitis (M45)
 arthrodesis status (Z98.1)
pseudoarthrosis after fusion or arthrodesis (M96.0)
M43.20 Other fusion of spine, multiple sites in spine
M43.21 Other fusion of spine, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M43.22 Other fusion of spine, cervical region
M43.23 Other fusion of spine, cervicothoracic region
M43.24 Other fusion of spine, thoracic region
M43.25 Other fusion of spine, thoracolumbar region
M43.26 Other fusion of spine, lumbar region
M43.27 Other fusion of spine, lumbosacral region
M43.28 Other fusion of spine, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M43.29 Other fusion of spine, unspecified site
M43.3 Recurrent atlantoaxial subluxation with myelopathy
M43.4 Other recurrent atlantoaxial subluxation
M43.5 Other recurrent vertebral subluxation
     Excludes:
    biomechanical lesions NEC (M99-)
M43.50 Other recurrent vertebral subluxation, multiple sites in spine
M43.52 Other recurrent vertebral subluxation, cervical region
M43.53 Other recurrent vertebral subluxation, cervicothoracic region
M43.54 Other recurrent vertebral subluxation, thoracic region
M43.55 Other recurrent vertebral subluxation, thoracolumbar region
M43.56 Other recurrent vertebral subluxation, lumbar region
M43.57 Other recurrent vertebral subluxation, lumbosacral region
M43.58 Other recurrent vertebral subluxation, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M43.59 Other recurrent vertebral subluxation, unspecified site
M43.6 Torticollis
     Excludes:
M43.84
torticollis:
•
congenital (sternomastoid) (Q68.0)
•
current injury - see injury of spine by body region
•
due to birth injury (P15.2)
•
psychogenic (F45.8)
•
spasmodic (G24.3)
M43.8 Other specified deforming dorsopathies
     Excludes:
    kyphosis and lordosis (M40-)
   scoliosis (M41-)
M43.80 Other specified deforming dorsopathies, multiple sites in spine
M43.81 Other specified deforming dorsopathies, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M43.82 Other specified deforming dorsopathies, cervical region
M43.83 Other specified deforming dorsopathies, cervicothoracic region
M43.84 Other specified deforming dorsopathies, thoracic region
515
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M43.85 
M43.85
Other specified deforming dorsopathies, thoracolumbar region
M43.86 Other specified deforming dorsopathies, lumbar region
M43.87 Other specified deforming dorsopathies, lumbosacral region
M43.88 Other specified deforming dorsopathies, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M43.89 Other specified deforming dorsopathies, unspecified site
M43.9 Deforming dorsopathy, unspecified
     Includes:
    Curvature of spine NOS
M43.90 Deforming dorsopathy, unspecified, multiple sites in spine
M43.91 Deforming dorsopathy, unspecified, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M43.92 Deforming dorsopathy, unspecified, cervical region
M43.93 Deforming dorsopathy, unspecified, cervicothoracic region
M43.94 Deforming dorsopathy, unspecified, thoracic region
M43.95 Deforming dorsopathy, unspecified, thoracolumbar region
M43.96 Deforming dorsopathy, unspecified, lumbar region
M43.97 Deforming dorsopathy, unspecified, lumbosacral region
M43.98 Deforming dorsopathy, unspecified, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M43.99 Deforming dorsopathy, unspecified, unspecified site
Spondylopathies
(M45-M49)
M45
Ankylosing spondylitis
Includes:
Excludes:
M46
Rheumatoid arthritis of spine
arthropathy in Reiter's disease (M02.3)
Behçet's disease (M35.2)
juvenile (ankylosing) spondylitis (M08.1)
Other inflammatory spondylopathies
M46.0 Spinal enthesopathy
     Includes:
    Disorder of ligamentous or muscular attachments of spine
M46.00 Spinal enthesopathy, multiple sites in spine
M46.01 Spinal enthesopathy, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M46.02 Spinal enthesopathy, cervical region
M46.03 Spinal enthesopathy, cervicothoracic region
M46.04 Spinal enthesopathy, thoracic region
M46.05 Spinal enthesopathy, thoracolumbar region
M46.06 Spinal enthesopathy, lumbar region
M46.07 Spinal enthesopathy, lumbosacral region
M46.08 Spinal enthesopathy, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M46.09 Spinal enthesopathy, unspecified site
M46.1 Sacroiliitis, not elsewhere classified
M46.2 Osteomyelitis of vertebra
M46.20 Osteomyelitis of vertebra, multiple sites in spine
M46.22o Osteomyelitis of vertebra, cervical region
M46.25 Osteomyelitis of vertebra, thoracolumbar region
516
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M46.28 Osteomyelitis of vertebra, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M46.29 Osteomyelitis of vertebra, unspecified site
M46.3 Infection of intervertebral disc (pyogenic)
     Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
M46.30 Infection of intervertebral disc (pyogenic), multiple sites in spine
M46.32 Infection of intervertebral disc (pyogenic), cervical region
M46.33 Infection of intervertebral disc (pyogenic), cervicothoracic region
M46.34 Infection of intervertebral disc (pyogenic), thoracic region
M46.35 Infection of intervertebral disc (pyogenic), thoracolumbar region
M46.36 Infection of intervertebral disc (pyogenic), lumbar region
M46.37 Infection of intervertebral disc (pyogenic), lumbosacral region
M46.39 Infection of intervertebral disc (pyogenic), unspecified site
M46.4 Discitis, unspecified
M46.40 Discitis, unspecified, multiple sites in spine
M46.42 Discitis, unspecified, cervical region
M46.43 Discitis, unspecified, cervicothoracic region
M46.44 Discitis, unspecified, thoracic region
M46.45 Discitis, unspecified, thoracolumbar region
M46.46 Discitis, unspecified, lumbar region
M46.47 Discitis, unspecified, lumbosacral region
M46.49 Discitis, unspecified, unspecified site
M46.5 Other infective spondylopathies
M46.50 Other infective spondylopathies, multiple sites in spine
M46.51 Other infective spondylopathies, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M46.52 Other infective spondylopathies, cervical region
M46.53 Other infective spondylopathies, cervicothoracic region
M46.54 Other infective spondylopathies, thoracic region
M46.55 Other infective spondylopathies, thoracolumbar region
M46.56 Other infective spondylopathies, lumbar region
M46.57 Other infective spondylopathies, lumbosacral region
M46.58 Other infective spondylopathies, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M46.59 Other infective spondylopathies, unspecified site
M46.8 Other specified inflammatory spondylopathies
M46.80 Other specified inflammatory spondylopathies, multiple sites in spine
M46.81 Other specified inflammatory spondylopathies, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M46.82 Other specified inflammatory spondylopathies, cervical region
M46.83 Other specified inflammatory spondylopathies, cervicothoracic region
M46.84 Other specified inflammatory spondylopathies, thoracic region
M46.85 Other specified inflammatory spondylopathies, thoracolumbar region
M46.86 Other specified inflammatory spondylopathies, lumbar region
M46.87 Other specified inflammatory spondylopathies, lumbosacral region
M46.88 Other specified inflammatory spondylopathies, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M46.89 Other specified inflammatory spondylopathies, unspecified site
M46.89
517
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M46.9 
M46.9
Inflammatory spondylopathy, unspecified
M46.90 Inflammatory spondylopathy, unspecified, multiple sites in spine
M46.91 Inflammatory spondylopathy, unspecified, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M46.92 Inflammatory spondylopathy, unspecified, cervical region
M46.93 Inflammatory spondylopathy, unspecified, cervicothoracic region
M46.94 Inflammatory spondylopathy, unspecified, thoracic region
M46.95 Inflammatory spondylopathy, unspecified, thoracolumbar region
M46.96 Inflammatory spondylopathy, unspecified, lumbar region
M46.97 Inflammatory spondylopathy, unspecified, lumbosacral region
M46.98 Inflammatory spondylopathy, unspecified, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M46.99 Inflammatory spondylopathy, unspecified, unspecified site
M47
Spondylosis
Includes:
arthrosis or osteoarthritis of spine
degeneration of facet joints
M47.0 Anterior spinal and vertebral artery compression syndromes (G99.2*)
M47.00† Anterior spinal and vertebral artery compression syndromes, multiple sites in spine (G99.2*)
M47.01† Anterior spinal and vertebral artery compression syndromes, occipito-atlanto-axial region
         (G99.2*)
M47.02† Anterior spinal and vertebral artery compression syndromes, cervical region (G99.2*)
M47.03† Anterior spinal and vertebral artery compression syndromes, cervicothoracic region (G99.2*)
M47.04† Anterior spinal and vertebral artery compression syndromes, thoracic region (G99.2*)
M47.09† Anterior spinal and vertebral artery compression syndromes, unspecified site (G99.2*)
M47.1 Other spondylosis with myelopathy
     Includes:
    Spondylogenic compression of spinal cord (G99.2*)
   Excludes:
  vertebral subluxation (M43.3 - M43.5)
M47.10 Other spondylosis with myelopathy, multiple sites in spine
M47.11 Other spondylosis with myelopathy, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M47.12 Other spondylosis with myelopathy, cervical region
M47.13 Other spondylosis with myelopathy, cervicothoracic region
M47.14 Other spondylosis with myelopathy, thoracic region
M47.15 Other spondylosis with myelopathy, thoracolumbar region
M47.16 Other spondylosis with myelopathy, lumbar region
M47.17 Other spondylosis with myelopathy, lumbosacral region
M47.19 Other spondylosis with myelopathy, unspecified site
M47.2 Other spondylosis with radiculopathy
M47.20 Other spondylosis with radiculopathy, multiple sites in spine
M47.22 Other spondylosis with radiculopathy, cervical region
M47.23 Other spondylosis with radiculopathy, cervicothoracic region
M47.24 Other spondylosis with radiculopathy, thoracic region
M47.25 Other spondylosis with radiculopathy, thoracolumbar region
M47.26 Other spondylosis with radiculopathy, lumbar region
M47.27 Other spondylosis with radiculopathy, lumbosacral region
M47.29 Other spondylosis with radiculopathy, unspecified site
518
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M47.8
Other spondylosis
Includes:
Cervical spondylosis
Lumbosacral spondylosis
Thoracic spondylosis
M48.11
without myelopathy or radiculopathy
M47.80 Other spondylosis, multiple sites in spine
M47.81 Other spondylosis, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M47.82 Other spondylosis, cervical region
M47.83 Other spondylosis, cervicothoracic region
M47.84 Other spondylosis, thoracic region
M47.85 Other spondylosis, thoracolumbar region
M47.86 Other spondylosis, lumbar region
M47.87 Other spondylosis, lumbosacral region
M47.88 Other spondylosis, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M47.89 Other spondylosis, unspecified site
M47.9 Spondylosis, unspecified
M47.90 Spondylosis, unspecified, multiple sites in spine
M47.91 Spondylosis, unspecified, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M47.92 Spondylosis, unspecified, cervical region
M47.93 Spondylosis, unspecified, cervicothoracic region
M47.94 Spondylosis, unspecified, thoracic region
M47.95 Spondylosis, unspecified, thoracolumbar region
M47.96 Spondylosis, unspecified, lumbar region
M47.97 Spondylosis, unspecified, lumbosacral region
M47.98 Spondylosis, unspecified, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M47.99 Spondylosis, unspecified, unspecified site
M48
Other spondylopathies
M48.0 Spinal stenosis
     Includes:
    Caudal stenosis
M48.00 Spinal stenosis, multiple sites in spine
M48.01 Spinal stenosis, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M48.02 Spinal stenosis, cervical region
M48.03 Spinal stenosis, cervicothoracic region
M48.04 Spinal stenosis, thoracic region
M48.05 Spinal stenosis, thoracolumbar region
M48.06 Spinal stenosis, lumbar region
M48.07 Spinal stenosis, lumbosacral region
M48.08 Spinal stenosis, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M48.09 Spinal stenosis, unspecified site
M48.1 Ankylosing hyperostosis [Forestier]
     Includes:
    Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis [DISH]
M48.10 Ankylosing hyperostosis [Forestier], multiple sites in spine
M48.11 Ankylosing hyperostosis [Forestier], occipito-atlanto-axial region
519
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M48.12 
M48.12
Ankylosing hyperostosis [Forestier], cervical region
M48.13 Ankylosing hyperostosis [Forestier], cervicothoracic region
M48.14 Ankylosing hyperostosis [Forestier], thoracic region
M48.15 Ankylosing hyperostosis [Forestier], thoracolumbar region
M48.16 Ankylosing hyperostosis [Forestier], lumbar region
M48.17 Ankylosing hyperostosis [Forestier], lumbosacral region
M48.18 Ankylosing hyperostosis [Forestier], sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M48.19 Ankylosing hyperostosis [Forestier], unspecified site
M48.2 Kissing spine
M48.20 Kissing spine, multiple sites in spine
M48.21 Kissing spine, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M48.22 Kissing spine, cervical region
M48.23 Kissing spine, cervicothoracic region
M48.24 Kissing spine, thoracic region
M48.25 Kissing spine, thoracolumbar region
M48.26 Kissing spine, lumbar region
M48.27 Kissing spine, lumbosacral region
M48.28 Kissing spine, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M48.29 Kissing spine, unspecified site
M48.3 Traumatic spondylopathy
M48.30 Traumatic spondylopathy, multiple sites in spine
M48.31 Traumatic spondylopathy, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M48.32 Traumatic spondylopathy, cervical region
M48.33 Traumatic spondylopathy, cervicothoracic region
M48.34 Traumatic spondylopathy, thoracic region
M48.35 Traumatic spondylopathy, thoracolumbar region
M48.36 Traumatic spondylopathy, lumbar region
M48.37 Traumatic spondylopathy, lumbosacral region
M48.38 Traumatic spondylopathy, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M48.39 Traumatic spondylopathy, unspecified site
M48.4 Fatigue fracture of vertebra
     Includes:
    Stress fracture of vertebra
M48.40 Fatigue fracture of vertebra, multiple sites in spine
M48.41 Fatigue fracture of vertebra, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M48.42 Fatigue fracture of vertebra, cervical region
M48.43 Fatigue fracture of vertebra, cervicothoracic region
M48.44 Fatigue fracture of vertebra, thoracic region
M48.45 Fatigue fracture of vertebra, thoracolumbar region
M48.46 Fatigue fracture of vertebra, lumbar region
M48.47 Fatigue fracture of vertebra, lumbosacral region
M48.48 Fatigue fracture of vertebra, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M48.49 Fatigue fracture of vertebra, unspecified site
520
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M48.5
Collapsed vertebra, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Collapsed vertebra NOS
Wedging of vertebra NOS
Excludes:
collapsed vertebra in osteoporosis (M80-)
current injury - see injury of spine by body region
M48.50 Collapsed vertebra, not elsewhere classified, multiple sites in spine
M48.51 Collapsed vertebra, not elsewhere classified, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M48.52 Collapsed vertebra, not elsewhere classified, cervical region
M48.53 Collapsed vertebra, not elsewhere classified, cervicothoracic region
M48.54 Collapsed vertebra, not elsewhere classified, thoracic region
M48.55 Collapsed vertebra, not elsewhere classified, thoracolumbar region
M48.56 Collapsed vertebra, not elsewhere classified, lumbar region
M48.57 Collapsed vertebra, not elsewhere classified, lumbosacral region
M48.58 Collapsed vertebra, not elsewhere classified, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M48.59 Collapsed vertebra, not elsewhere classified, unspecified site
M48.8 Other specified spondylopathies
     Includes:
    Ossification of posterior longitudinal ligament
M48.80 Other specified spondylopathies, multiple sites in spine
M48.81 Other specified spondylopathies, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M48.82 Other specified spondylopathies, cervical region
M48.83 Other specified spondylopathies, cervicothoracic region
M48.84 Other specified spondylopathies, thoracic region
M48.85 Other specified spondylopathies, thoracolumbar region
M48.86 Other specified spondylopathies, lumbar region
M48.87 Other specified spondylopathies, lumbosacral region
M48.88 Other specified spondylopathies, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M48.89 Other specified spondylopathies, unspecified site
M48.9 Spondylopathy, unspecified
M48.90 Spondylopathy, unspecified, multiple sites in spine
M48.91 Spondylopathy, unspecified, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M48.92 Spondylopathy, unspecified, cervical region
M48.93 Spondylopathy, unspecified, cervicothoracic region
M48.94 Spondylopathy, unspecified, thoracic region
M48.95 Spondylopathy, unspecified, thoracolumbar region
M48.96 Spondylopathy, unspecified, lumbar region
M48.97 Spondylopathy, unspecified, lumbosacral region
M48.98 Spondylopathy, unspecified, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M48.99 
M49.2*
Spondylopathy, unspecified, unspecified site
M49*
Spondylopathies in diseases classified elsewhere
Excludes:
psoriatic and enteropathic arthropathies (M07.-*,M09.-*)
M49.0* Tuberculosis of spine (A18.0†)
        Includes:
       Pott's curvature
M49.1* Brucella spondylitis (A23.-†)
M49.2* Enterobacterial spondylitis (A01-A04†)
521
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M49.3* 
M49.3*
Spondylopathy in other infectious and parasitic disease classified elsewhere
Excludes:
neuropathic spondylopathy in tabes dorsalis (M49.4*)
M49.4* Neuropathic spondylopathy
      Includes:
     Neuropathic spondylopathy in:
    •
     syringomyelia and syringobulbia (G95.0†)
      •
       tabes dorsalis (A52.1†)
M49.5* Collapsed vertebra in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Metastatic fracture of vertebra (C79.5†)
M49.8* Spondylopathy in other diseases classified elsewhere
Other dorsopathies
(M50-M54)
Excludes:
M50
current injury - see injury of spine by body region
discitis NOS (M46.4)
Cervical disc disorders
Includes:
cervical disc disorders with cervicalgia
cervicothoracic disc disorders
M50.0† Cervical disc disorder with myelopathy (G99.2*)
M50.1† Cervical disc disorder with radiculopathy (G55.1*)
        Excludes:
       brachial radiculitis NOS (M54.1)
M50.2 Other cervical disc displacement
M50.3 Other cervical disc degeneration
M50.8 Other cervical disc disorders
M50.9 Cervical disc disorder, unspecified site
M51
Other intervertebral disc disorders
Includes:
thoracic, thoracolumbar and lumbosacral disc disorders
M51.0† Lumbar and other intervertebral disc disorders with myelopathy (G99.2*)
M51.1† Lumbar and other intervertebral disc disorders with radiculopathy (G55.1*)
        Includes:
       Sciatica due to intervertebral disc disorder
      Excludes:
     lumbar radiculitis NOS (M54.1)
M51.2 Other specified intervertebral disc displacement
     Includes:
    Lumbago due to displacement of intervertebral disc
M51.3 Other specified intervertebral disc degeneration
M51.4 Schmorl's nodes
M51.8 Other specified intervertebral disc disorders
M51.9 Intervertebral disc disorder, unspecified
M53
Other dorsopathies, not elsewhere classified
M53.0 Cervicocranial syndrome
     Includes:
    Posterior cervical sympathetic syndrome
M53.1 Cervicobrachial syndrome
     Excludes:
    cervical disc disorder (M50-)
   thoracic outlet syndrome (G54.0)
M53.2 Spinal instabilities
M53.20 Spinal instabilities, multiple sites in spine
M53.21 Spinal instabilities, occipito-atlanto-axial region
522
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M53.22 Spinal instabilities, cervical region
M53.23 Spinal instabilities, cervicothoracic region
M53.24 Spinal instabilities, thoracic region
M53.25 Spinal instabilities, thoracolumbar region
M53.26 Spinal instabilities, lumbar region
M53.27 Spinal instabilities, lumbosacral region
M53.28 Spinal instabilities, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M53.29 Spinal instabilities, unspecified site
M53.3 Sacrococcygeal disorders, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Coccygodynia
M53.8 Other specified dorsopathies
M53.80 Other specified dorsopathies, multiple sites in spine
M53.81 Other specified dorsopathies, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M53.82 Other specified dorsopathies, cervical region
M53.83 Other specified dorsopathies, cervicothoracic region
M53.84 Other specified dorsopathies, thoracic region
M53.85 Other specified dorsopathies, thoracolumbar region
M53.86 Other specified dorsopathies, lumbar region
M53.87 Other specified dorsopathies, lumbosacral region
M53.88 Other specified dorsopathies, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M53.89 Other specified dorsopathies, unspecified site
M53.9 Dorsopathy, unspecified
M53.90 Dorsopathy, unspecified, multiple sites in spine
M53.91 Dorsopathy, unspecified, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M53.92 Dorsopathy, unspecified, cervical region
M53.93 Dorsopathy, unspecified, cervicothoracic region
M53.94 Dorsopathy, unspecified, thoracic region
M53.95 Dorsopathy, unspecified, thoracolumbar region
M53.96 Dorsopathy, unspecified, lumbar region
M53.97 Dorsopathy, unspecified, lumbosacral region
M53.98 Dorsopathy, unspecified, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M53.99 Dorsopathy, unspecified, unspecified site
M54
M54.04
Dorsalgia
Excludes:
psychogenic dorsalgia (F45.4)
M54.0 Panniculitis affecting regions of neck and back
     Excludes:
    panniculitis:
   •
    NOS (M79.3)
   •
    lupus (L93.2)
   •
    relapsing [Weber-Christian] (M35.6)
M54.00 Panniculitis affecting regions of neck and back, multiple sites in spine
M54.01 Panniculitis affecting regions of neck and back, occipito-atlanto-axial region
M54.02 Panniculitis affecting regions of neck and back, cervical region
M54.03 Panniculitis affecting regions of neck and back, cervicothoracic region
M54.04 Panniculitis affecting regions of neck and back, thoracic region
523
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M54.05 
M54.05
Panniculitis affecting regions of neck and back, thoracolumbar region
M54.06 Panniculitis affecting regions of neck and back, lumbar region
M54.07 Panniculitis affecting regions of neck and back, lumbosacral region
M54.08 Panniculitis affecting regions of neck and back, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M54.09 Panniculitis affecting regions of neck and back, unspecified site
M54.1 Radiculopathy
     Includes:
    Neuritis or radiculitis:
   •
    brachial NOS
   •
    lumbar NOS
   •
    thoracic NOS
   Radiculitis NOS
  Excludes:
 neuralgia and neuritis NOS (M79.2)
radiculopathy with:
•
 cervical disc disorder (M50.1)
•
 lumbar and other intervertebral disc disorder (M51.1)
•
 spondylosis (M47.2)
M54.10 Radiculopathy, multiple sites in spine
M54.12 Radiculopathy, cervical region
M54.13 Radiculopathy, cervicothoracic region
M54.14 Radiculopathy, thoracic region
M54.15 Radiculopathy, thoracolumbar region
M54.16 Radiculopathy, lumbar region
M54.17 Radiculopathy, lumbosacral region
M54.18 Radiculopathy, sacral and sacrococcygeal region
M54.19 Radiculopathy, unspecified site
M54.2 Cervicalgia
     Excludes:
    cervicalgia due to intervertebral cervical disc disorder M50-)
M54.3 Sciatica
     Excludes:
lesion of sciatic nerve (G57.0)
sciatic:
•
due to intervertebral disc disorder (M51.1)
•
with lumbago (M54.4)
M54.4 Lumbago with sciatica
     Excludes:
    that due to intervertebral disc disorder (M51.1)
M54.5 Low back pain
     Includes:
    Loin pain
   Low back strain
  Lumbago NOS
 Excludes:
lumbago:
•
 due to intervertebral disc displacement (M51.2)
•
 with sciatica (M54.4)
M54.6 Pain in thoracic spine
     Excludes:
    pain due to intervertebral disc disorder (M51-)
M54.8 Other dorsalgia
M54.9 Dorsalgia, unspecified site
     Includes:
    Backache NOS
524
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
Soft tissue disorders
(M60-M79)
M60.20
Disorders of muscles
(M60-M63)
Excludes:
M60
dermatopolymyositis (M33.-)
muscular dystrophies and myopathies (G71-G72)
myopathy in:
•
amyloidosis (E85.-)
•
polyarteritis nodosa (M30.0)
•
rheumatoid arthritis (M05.3)
•
scleroderma (M34.-)
•
Sjögren's syndrome (M35.0)
•
systemic lupus erythematosus (M32.-)
Myositis
M60.0 Infective myositis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Tropical pyomyositis
 Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
M60.00 Infective myositis, multiple sites
M60.01 Infective myositis, shoulder region
M60.02 Infective myositis, upper arm
M60.03 Infective myositis, forearm
M60.04 Infective myositis, hand
M60.05 Infective myositis, pelvic region and thigh
M60.06 Infective myositis, lower leg
M60.07 Infective myositis, ankle and foot
M60.08 Infective myositis, other
M60.09 Infective myositis, unspecified site
M60.1 Interstitial myositis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M60.10 Interstitial myositis, multiple sites
M60.11 Interstitial myositis, shoulder region
M60.12 Interstitial myositis, upper arm
M60.13 Interstitial myositis, forearm
M60.14 Interstitial myositis, hand
M60.15 Interstitial myositis, pelvic region and thigh
M60.16 Interstitial myositis, lower leg
M60.17 Interstitial myositis, ankle and foot
M60.18 Interstitial myositis, other site
M60.19 Interstitial myositis, unspecified site
M60.2 Foreign body granuloma of soft tissue, not elsewhere classified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  foreign body granuloma of skin and subcutaneous tissue (L92.3)
M60.20 Foreign body granuloma of soft tissue, not elsewhere classified, multiple sites
525
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M60.21 
M60.21
Foreign body granuloma of soft tissue, not elsewhere classified, shoulder region
M60.22 Foreign body granuloma of soft tissue, not elsewhere classified, upper arm
M60.23 Foreign body granuloma of soft tissue, not elsewhere classified, forearm
M60.24 Foreign body granuloma of soft tissue, not elsewhere classified, hand
M60.25 Foreign body granuloma of soft tissue, not elsewhere classified, pelvic region and thigh
M60.26 Foreign body granuloma of soft tissue, not elsewhere classified, lower leg
M60.27 Foreign body granuloma of soft tissue, not elsewhere classified, ankle and foot
M60.28 Foreign body granuloma of soft tissue, not elsewhere classified, other site
M60.29 Foreign body granuloma of soft tissue, not elsewhere classified, unspecified site
M60.8 Other myositis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M60.80 Other myositis, multiple sites
M60.81 Other myositis, shoulder region
M60.82 Other myositis, upper arm
M60.83 Other myositis, forearm
M60.84 Other myositis, hand
M60.85 Other myositis, pelvic region and thigh
M60.86 Other myositis, lower leg
M60.87 Other myositis, ankle and foot
M60.88 Other myositis, other site
M60.89 Other myositis, unspecified site
M60.9 Myositis, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M60.90 Myositis, unspecified, multiple sites
M60.91 Myositis, unspecified, shoulder region
M60.92 Myositis, unspecified, upper arm
M60.93 Myositis, unspecified, forearm
M60.94 Myositis, unspecified, hand
M60.95 Myositis, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M60.96 Myositis, unspecified, lower leg
M60.97 Myositis, unspecified, ankle and foot
M60.98 Myositis, unspecified, other site
M60.99 Myositis unspecified, unspecified site
M61
Calcification and ossification of muscle
M61.0 Myositis ossificans traumatica
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M61.00 Myositis ossificans traumatica, multiple sites
M61.01 Myositis ossificans traumatica, shoulder region
M61.02 Myositis ossificans traumatica, upper arm
M61.03 Myositis ossificans traumatica, forearm
M61.04 Myositis ossificans traumatica, hand
M61.05 Myositis ossificans traumatica, pelvic region and thigh
M61.06 Myositis ossificans traumatica, lower leg
526
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M61.07 Myositis ossificans traumatica, ankle and foot
M61.08 Myositis ossificans traumatica, other site
M61.09 Myositis ossificans traumatica, unspecified site
M61.1 Myositis ossificans progressiva
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva
M61.10 Myositis ossificans progressiva, multiple sites
M61.11 Myositis ossificans progressiva, shoulder region
M61.12 Myositis ossificans progressiva, upper arm
M61.13 Myositis ossificans progressiva, forearm
M61.14 Myositis ossificans progressiva, hand
M61.15 Myositis ossificans progressiva, pelvic region and thigh
M61.16 Myositis ossificans progressiva, lower leg
M61.17 Myositis ossificans progressiva, ankle and foot
M61.18 Myositis ossificans progressiva, other site
M61.19 Myositis ossificans progressiva, unspecified site
M61.2 Paralytic calcification and ossification of muscle
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Myositis ossificans associated with quadriplegia or paraplegia
M61.20 Paralytic calcification and ossification of muscle, multiple sites
M61.21 Paralytic calcification and ossification of muscle, shoulder region
M61.22 Paralytic calcification and ossification of muscle, upper arm
M61.23 Paralytic calcification and ossification of muscle, forearm
M61.24 Paralytic calcification and ossification of muscle, hand
M61.25 Paralytic calcification and ossification of muscle, pelvic region and thigh
M61.26 Paralytic calcification and ossification of muscle, lower leg
M61.27 Paralytic calcification and ossification of muscle, ankle and foot
M61.28 Paralytic calcification and ossification of muscle, other site
M61.29 Paralytic calcification and ossification of muscle, unspecified site
M61.3 Calcification and ossification of muscles associated with burns
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Myositis ossificans associated with burns
M61.30 Calcification and ossification of muscles associated with burns, multiple sites
M61.31 Calcification and ossification of muscles associated with burns, shoulder region
M61.32 Calcification and ossification of muscles associated with burns, upper arm
M61.33 Calcification and ossification of muscles associated with burns, forearm
M61.34 Calcification and ossification of muscles associated with burns, hand
M61.35 Calcification and ossification of muscles associated with burns, pelvic region and thigh
M61.36 Calcification and ossification of muscles associated with burns, lower leg
M61.37 Calcification and ossification of muscles associated with burns, ankle and foot
M61.38 Calcification and ossification of muscles associated with burns, other site
M61.39 Calcification and ossification of muscles associated with burns, unspecified site
M61.39
527
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M61.4 Other calcification of muscle
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  calcific tendinitis (M65.2):
 •
  of shoulder (M75.3)
M61.40 Other calcification of muscle, multiple sites
M61.41 Other calcification of muscle, shoulder region
M61.42 Other calcification of muscle, upper arm
M61.43 Other calcification of muscle, forearm
M61.44 Other calcification of muscle, hand
M61.45 Other calcification of muscle, pelvic region and thigh
M61.46 Other calcification of muscle, lower leg
M61.47 Other calcification of muscle, ankle and foot
M61.48 Other calcification of muscle, other site
M61.49 Other calcification of muscle, unspecified site
M61.5 Other ossification of muscle
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M61.50 Other ossification of muscle, multiple sites
M61.51 Other ossification of muscle, shoulder region
M61.52 Other ossification of muscle, upper arm
M61.53 Other ossification of muscle, forearm
M61.54 Other ossification of muscle, hand
M61.55 Other ossification of muscle, pelvic region and thigh
M61.56 Other ossification of muscle, lower leg
M61.57 Other ossification of muscle, ankle and foot
M61.58 Other ossification of muscle, other site
M61.59 Other ossification of muscle, unspecified site
M61.9 Calcification and ossification of muscle, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M61.90 Calcification and ossification of muscle, unspecified, multiple sites
M61.91 Calcification and ossification of muscle, unspecified, shoulder region
M61.92 Calcification and ossification of muscle, unspecified, upper arm
M61.93 Calcification and ossification of muscle, unspecified, forearm
M61.94 Calcification and ossification of muscle, unspecified, hand
M61.95 Calcification and ossification of muscle, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M61.96 Calcification and ossification of muscle, unspecified, lower leg
M61.97 Calcification and ossification of muscle, unspecified, ankle and foot
M61.98 Calcification and ossification of muscle, unspecified, other site
M61.99 Calcification and ossification of muscle unspecified, unspecified site
M61.4
528
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M62
Other disorders of muscle
Excludes:
cramp and spasm (R25.2)
myalgia (M79.1)
myopathy:
•
alcoholic (G72.1)
•
drug-induced (G72.0)
stiff-man syndrome (G25.8)
M62.0 Diastasis of muscle
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M62.00 Diastasis of muscle, multiple sites
M62.01 Diastasis of muscle, shoulder region
M62.02 Diastasis of muscle, upper arm
M62.03 Diastasis of muscle, forearm
M62.04 Diastasis of muscle, hand
M62.05 Diastasis of muscle, pelvic region and thigh
M62.06 Diastasis of muscle, lower leg
M62.07 Diastasis of muscle, ankle and foot
M62.08 Diastasis of muscle, other site
M62.09 Diastasis of muscle, unspecified site
M62.1 Other rupture of muscle (nontraumatic)
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  rupture of tendon (M66-)
 traumatic rupture of muscle - see injury of muscle by body region
M62.10 Other rupture of muscle (nontraumatic), multiple sites
M62.11 Other rupture of muscle (nontraumatic), shoulder region
M62.12 Other rupture of muscle (nontraumatic), upper arm
M62.13 Other rupture of muscle (nontraumatic), forearm
M62.14 Other rupture of muscle (nontraumatic), hand
M62.15 Other rupture of muscle (nontraumatic), pelvic region and thigh
M62.16 Other rupture of muscle (nontraumatic), lower leg
M62.17 Other rupture of muscle (nontraumatic), ankle and foot
M62.18 Other rupture of muscle (nontraumatic), other site
M62.19 Other rupture of muscle (nontraumatic), unspecified site
M62.2 Ischaemic infarction of muscle
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter XIII]
   Includes:
  Compartment syndrome, non-traumatic
 Excludes:
compartment syndrome, traumatic (abdominal) (T79.6)
traumatic ischaemia of muscle (T79.6)
Volkmann's ischaemic contracture (T79.6)
M62.20 Ischaemic infarction of muscle, multiple sites
M62.21 Ischaemic infarction of muscle, shoulder region
M62.22 Ischaemic infarction of muscle, upper arm
M62.23 Ischaemic infarction of muscle, forearm
M62.24 Ischaemic infarction of muscle, hand
M62.25 Ischaemic infarction of muscle, pelvic region and thigh
M62.26 
M62.26
Ischaemic infarction of muscle, lower leg
529
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M62.27 
M62.27
Ischaemic infarction of muscle, ankle and foot
M62.28 Ischaemic infarction of muscle, other site
M62.29 Ischaemic infarction of muscle, unspecified site
M62.3 Immobility syndrome (paraplegic)
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M62.30 Immobility syndrome (paraplegic), multiple sites
M62.31 Immobility syndrome (paraplegic), shoulder region
M62.32 Immobility syndrome (paraplegic), upper arm
M62.33 Immobility syndrome (paraplegic), forearm
M62.34 Immobility syndrome (paraplegic), hand
M62.35 Immobility syndrome (paraplegic), pelvic region and thigh
M62.36 Immobility syndrome (paraplegic), lower leg
M62.37 Immobility syndrome (paraplegic), ankle and foot
M62.38 Immobility syndrome (paraplegic), other site
M62.39 Immobility syndrome (paraplegic), unspecified site
M62.4 Contracture of muscle
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  contracture of joint (M24.5)
M62.40 Contracture of muscle, multiple sites
M62.41 Contracture of muscle, shoulder region
M62.42 Contracture of muscle, upper arm
M62.43 Contracture of muscle, forearm
M62.44 Contracture of muscle, hand
M62.45 Contracture of muscle, pelvic region and thigh
M62.46 Contracture of muscle, lower leg
M62.47 Contracture of muscle, ankle and foot
M62.48 Contracture of muscle, other site
M62.49 Contracture of muscle, unspecified site
M62.5 Muscle wasting and atrophy, not elsewhere classified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Disuse atrophy NEC
M62.50 Muscle wasting and atrophy, not elsewhere classified, multiple sites
M62.51 Muscle wasting and atrophy, not elsewhere classified, shoulder region
M62.52 Muscle wasting and atrophy, not elsewhere classified, upper arm
M62.53 Muscle wasting and atrophy, not elsewhere classified, forearm
M62.54 Muscle wasting and atrophy, not elsewhere classified, hand
M62.55 Muscle wasting and atrophy, not elsewhere classified, pelvic region and thigh
M62.56 Muscle wasting and atrophy, not elsewhere classified, lower leg
M62.57 Muscle wasting and atrophy, not elsewhere classified, ankle and foot
M62.58 Muscle wasting and atrophy, not elsewhere classified, other site
M62.59 Muscle wasting and atrophy, not elsewhere classified, unspecified site
M62.6 Muscle strain
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  current injury - see injury of muscle by body region
530
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M62.60 Muscle strain, multiple sites
M62.61 Muscle strain, shoulder region
M62.62 Muscle strain, upper arm
M62.63 Muscle strain, forearm
M62.64 Muscle strain, hand
M62.65 Muscle strain, pelvic region and thigh
M62.66 Muscle strain, lower leg
M62.67 Muscle strain, ankle and foot
M62.68 Muscle strain, other site
M62.69 Muscle strain, unspecified
M62.8 Other specified disorders of muscle
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Muscle (sheath) hernia
M62.80 Other specified disorders of muscle, multiple sites
M62.81 Other specified disorders of muscle, shoulder region
M62.82 Other specified disorders of muscle, upper arm
M62.83 Other specified disorders of muscle, forearm
M62.84 Other specified disorders of muscle, hand
M62.85 Other specified disorders of muscle, pelvic region and thigh
M62.86 Other specified disorders of muscle, lower leg
M62.87 Other specified disorders of muscle, ankle and foot
M62.88 Other specified disorders of muscle, other site
M62.89 Other specified disorders of muscle, unspecified site
M62.9 Disorder of muscle, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M62.90 Disorder of muscle, unspecified, multiple sites
M62.91 Disorder of muscle, unspecified, shoulder region
M62.92 Disorder of muscle, unspecified, upper arm
M62.93 Disorder of muscle, unspecified, forearm
M62.94 Disorder of muscle, unspecified, hand
M62.95 Disorder of muscle, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M62.96 Disorder of muscle, unspecified, lower leg
M62.97 Disorder of muscle, unspecified, ankle and foot
M62.98 Disorder of muscle unspecified, other site
M62.99 Disorder of muscle unspecified, unspecified site
M62.99
531
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M63*
Disorders of muscle in diseases classified elsewhere
Excludes:
M63*
myopathy in:
•
endocrine diseases (G73.5*)
•
metabolic diseases (G73.6*)
M63.0* Myositis in bacterial diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Myositis in:
    •
     leprosy [Hansen's disease] (A30.-†)
      •
       syphilis (A51.4†)(A52.7†)
M63.1* Myositis in protozoal and parasitic infections classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Myositis in:
    •
     cysticercosis (B69.8†)
      •
       schistosomiasis [bilharziasis] (B65.-†)
        •
         toxoplasmosis (B58.8†)
          •
           trichinellosis (B75†)
M63.2* Myositis in other infectious diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Myositis in mycosis (B35-B49†)
M63.3* Myositis in sarcoidosis (D86.8†)
M63.8* Other disorders of muscle in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of synovium and tendon
(M65-M68)
M65
Synovitis and tenosynovitis
Excludes:
chronic crepitant synovitis of hand and wrist (M70.0)
current injury - see injury of ligament or tendon by body region
soft tissue disorders related to use, overuse and pressure (M70.-)
M65.0 Abscess of tendon sheath
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Use additional code (B95-B96) to identify bacterial agent.
M65.00 Abscess of tendon sheath, multiple sites
M65.01 Abscess of tendon sheath, shoulder region
M65.02 Abscess of tendon sheath, upper arm
M65.03 Abscess of tendon sheath, forearm
M65.04 Abscess of tendon sheath, hand
M65.05 Abscess of tendon sheath, pelvic region and thigh
M65.06 Abscess of tendon sheath, lower leg
M65.07 Abscess of tendon sheath, ankle and foot
M65.08 Abscess of tendon sheath, other site
M65.09 Abscess of tendon sheath, unspecified site
M65.1 Other infective (teno)synovitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M65.10 Other infective (teno)synovitis, multiple sites
M65.11 Other infective (teno)synovitis, shoulder region
M65.12 Other infective (teno)synovitis, upper arm
M65.13 Other infective (teno)synovitis, forearm
M65.14 Other infective (teno)synovitis, hand
M65.15 Other infective (teno)synovitis, pelvic region and thigh
M65.16 Other infective (teno)synovitis, lower leg
532
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M65.17 Other infective (teno)synovitis, ankle and foot
M65.18 Other infective (teno)synovitis, other site
M65.19 Other infective (teno)synovitis, unspecified site
M65.2 Calcific tendinitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  of shoulder (M75.3)
 specified tendinitis (M75-M77)
M65.20 Calcific tendinitis, multiple sites
M65.22 Calcific tendinitis, upper arm
M65.23 Calcific tendinitis, forearm
M65.24 Calcific tendinitis, hand
M65.25 Calcific tendinitis, pelvic region and thigh
M65.26 Calcific tendinitis, lower leg
M65.27 Calcific tendinitis, ankle and foot
M65.28 Calcific tendinitis, other site
M65.29 Calcific tendinitis, unspecified site
M65.3 Trigger finger
     Includes:
    Nodular tendinous disease
M65.4 Radial styloid tenosynovitis [de Quervain]
M65.8 Other synovitis and tenosynovitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Irritable hip
M65.80 Other synovitis and tenosynovitis, multiple sites
M65.81 Other synovitis and tenosynovitis, shoulder region
M65.82 Other synovitis and tenosynovitis, upper arm
M65.83 Other synovitis and tenosynovitis, forearm
M65.84 Other synovitis and tenosynovitis, hand
M65.85 Other synovitis and tenosynovitis, pelvic region and thigh
      Includes:
     Irritable hip
M65.86 Other synovitis and tenosynovitis, lower leg
M65.87 Other synovitis and tenosynovitis, ankle and foot
M65.88 Other synovitis and tenosynovitis, other site
M65.89 Other synovitis and tenosynovitis, unspecified site
M65.9 Synovitis and tenosynovitis, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M65.90 Synovitis and tenosynovitis, unspecified, multiple sites
M65.91 Synovitis and tenosynovitis, unspecified, shoulder region
M65.92 Synovitis and tenosynovitis, unspecified, upper arm
M65.93 Synovitis and tenosynovitis, unspecified, forearm
M65.94 Synovitis and tenosynovitis, unspecified, hand
M65.95 Synovitis and tenosynovitis, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M65.96 Synovitis and tenosynovitis, unspecified, lower leg
M65.97 Synovitis and tenosynovitis, unspecified, ankle and foot
M65.98 Synovitis and tenosynovitis unspecified, other site
M65.98
533
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M65.99 
M65.99
Synovitis and tenosynovitis unspecified, unspecified site
M66 Spontaneous rupture of synovium and tendon
Includes:
Excludes:
rupture that occurs when a normal force is applied to tissues that are inferred to have less than
normal strength
rotator cuff syndrome (M75.1)
rupture where an abnormal force is applied to normal tissue - see injury of tendon by body region
M66.0 Rupture of popliteal cyst
M66.1 Rupture of synovium
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Rupture of synovial cyst
 Excludes:
rupture of popliteal cyst (M66.0)
M66.10 Rupture of synovium, multiple sites
M66.11 Rupture of synovium, shoulder region
M66.12 Rupture of synovium, upper arm
M66.13 Rupture of synovium, forearm
M66.14 Rupture of synovium, hand
M66.15 Rupture of synovium, pelvic region and thigh
M66.16 Rupture of synovium, lower leg
M66.17 Rupture of synovium, ankle and foot
M66.18 Rupture of synovium, other site
M66.19 Rupture of synovium, unspecified site
M66.2 Spontaneous rupture of extensor tendons
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M66.20 Spontaneous rupture of extensor tendons, multiple sites
M66.21 Spontaneous rupture of extensor tendons, shoulder region
M66.22 Spontaneous rupture of extensor tendons, upper arm
M66.23 Spontaneous rupture of extensor tendons, forearm
M66.24 Spontaneous rupture of extensor tendons, hand
M66.25 Spontaneous rupture of extensor tendons, pelvic region and thigh
M66.26 Spontaneous rupture of extensor tendons, lower leg
M66.27 Spontaneous rupture of extensor tendons, ankle and foot
M66.28 Spontaneous rupture of extensor tendons, other site
M66.29 Spontaneous rupture of extensor tendons, unspecified site
M66.3 Spontaneous rupture of flexor tendons
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M66.30 Spontaneous rupture of flexor tendons, multiple sites
M66.31 Spontaneous rupture of flexor tendons, shoulder region
M66.32 Spontaneous rupture of flexor tendons, upper arm
M66.33 Spontaneous rupture of flexor tendons, forearm
M66.34 Spontaneous rupture of flexor tendons, hand
M66.35 Spontaneous rupture of flexor tendons, pelvic region and thigh
M66.36 Spontaneous rupture of flexor tendons, lower leg
M66.37 Spontaneous rupture of flexor tendons, ankle and foot
M66.38 Spontaneous rupture of flexor tendons, other site
534
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M66.39 Spontaneous rupture of flexor tendons, unspecified site
M66.4 Spontaneous rupture of other tendons
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M66.40 Spontaneous rupture of other tendons, multiple sites
M66.41 Spontaneous rupture of other tendons, shoulder region
M66.42 Spontaneous rupture of other tendons, upper arm
M66.43 Spontaneous rupture of other tendons, forearm
M66.44 Spontaneous rupture of other tendons, hand
M66.45 Spontaneous rupture of other tendons, pelvic region and thigh
M66.46 Spontaneous rupture of other tendons, lower leg
M66.47 Spontaneous rupture of other tendons, ankle and foot
M66.48 Spontaneous rupture of other tendons, other site
M66.49 Spontaneous rupture of other tendons, unspecified site
M66.5 Spontaneous rupture of unspecified tendon
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M66.50 Spontaneous rupture of unspecified tendon, multiple sites
M66.51 Spontaneous rupture of unspecified tendon, shoulder region
M66.52 Spontaneous rupture of unspecified tendon, upper arm
M66.53 Spontaneous rupture of unspecified tendon, forearm
M66.54 Spontaneous rupture of unspecified tendon, hand
M66.55 Spontaneous rupture of unspecified tendon, pelvic region and thigh
M66.56 Spontaneous rupture of unspecified tendon, lower leg
M66.57 Spontaneous rupture of unspecified tendon, ankle and foot
M66.58 Spontaneous rupture of unspecified tendon, other site
M66.59 Spontaneous rupture of unspecified tendon, unspecified site
M67
M67.19
Other disorders of synovium and tendon
Excludes:
palmar fascial fibromatosis [Dupuytren] (M72.0)
tendinitis NOS (M77.9)
xanthomatosis localized to tendons (E78.2)
M67.0 Short Achilles tendon (acquired)
M67.1 Other contracture of tendon (sheath)
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  with contracture of joint (M24.5)
M67.10 Other contracture of tendon (sheath), multiple sites
M67.11 Other contracture of tendon (sheath), shoulder region
M67.12 Other contracture of tendon (sheath), upper arm
M67.13 Other contracture of tendon (sheath), forearm
M67.14 Other contracture of tendon (sheath), hand
M67.15 Other contracture of tendon (sheath), pelvic region and thigh
M67.16 Other contracture of tendon (sheath), lower leg
M67.17 Other contracture of tendon (sheath), ankle and foot
M67.18 Other contracture of tendon (sheath), other site
M67.19 Other contracture of tendon (sheath), unspecified site
535
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M67.2 Synovial hypertrophy, not elsewhere classified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  villonodular synovitis (pigmented) (M12.2)
M67.20 Synovial hypertrophy, not elsewhere classified multiple sites
M67.21 Synovial hypertrophy, not elsewhere classified, shoulder region
M67.22 Synovial hypertrophy, not elsewhere classified, upper arm
M67.23 Synovial hypertrophy, not elsewhere classified, forearm
M67.24 Synovial hypertrophy, not elsewhere classified, hand
M67.25 Synovial hypertrophy, not elsewhere classified, pelvic region and thigh
M67.26 Synovial hypertrophy, not elsewhere classified, lower leg
M67.27 Synovial hypertrophy, not elsewhere classified, ankle and foot
M67.28 Synovial hypertrophy, not elsewhere classified, other site
M67.29 Synovial hypertrophy, not elsewhere classified, unspecified site
M67.3 Transient synovitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Toxic synovitis
 Excludes:
palindromic rheumatism (M12.3)
M67.30 Transient synovitis, multiple sites
M67.31 Transient synovitis, shoulder region
M67.32 Transient synovitis, upper arm
M67.33 Transient synovitis, forearm
M67.34 Transient synovitis, hand
M67.35 Transient synovitis, pelvic region and thigh
M67.36 Transient synovitis, lower leg
M67.37 Transient synovitis, ankle and foot
M67.38 Transient synovitis, other site
M67.39 Transient synovitis, unspecified site
M67.4 Ganglion
     Note:
    Includes:
   Excludes:
M67.2
[To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
Ganglion of joint or tendon (sheath)
cyst of:
•
bursa (M71.2-M71.3)
•
synovium (M71.2-M71.3)
ganglion in yaws (A66.6)
M67.40 Ganglion, multiple sites
M67.41 Ganglion, shoulder region
M67.42 Ganglion, upper arm
M67.43 Ganglion, forearm
M67.44 Ganglion, hand
M67.45 Ganglion, pelvic region and thigh
M67.46 Ganglion, lower leg
M67.47 Ganglion, ankle and foot
M67.48 Ganglion, other site
M67.49 Ganglion, unspecified site
M67.8 Other specified disorders of synovium and tendon
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
536
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M67.80 Other specified disorders of synovium and tendon, multiple sites
M67.81 Other specified disorders of synovium and tendon, shoulder region
M67.82 Other specified disorders of synovium and tendon, upper arm
M67.83 Other specified disorders of synovium and tendon, forearm
M67.84 Other specified disorders of synovium and tendon, hand
M67.85 Other specified disorders of synovium and tendon, pelvic region and thigh
M67.86 Other specified disorders of synovium and tendon, lower leg
M67.87 Other specified disorders of synovium and tendon, ankle and foot
M67.88 Other specified disorders of synovium and tendon, other site
M67.89 Other specified disorders of synovium and tendon, unspecified site
M67.9 Disorder of synovium and tendon, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M67.90 Disorder of synovium and tendon, unspecified, multiple sites
M67.91 Disorder of synovium and tendon, unspecified, shoulder region
M67.92 Disorder of synovium and tendon, unspecified, upper arm
M67.93 Disorder of synovium and tendon, unspecified, forearm
M67.94 Disorder of synovium and tendon, unspecified, hand
M67.95 Disorder of synovium and tendon, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M67.96 Disorder of synovium and tendon, unspecified, lower leg
M67.97 Disorder of synovium and tendon, unspecified, ankle and foot
M67.98 Disorder of synovium and tendon, unspecified, other site
M67.99 Disorder of synovium and tendon, unspecified, unspecified site
M68*
M68.8*
Disorders of synovium and tendon in diseases classified elsewhere
M68.0* Synovitis and tenosynovitis in bacterial diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Synovitis or tenosynovitis in:
    •
     gonorrhoea (A54.4†)
      •
       syphilis (A52.7†)
        •
         tuberculosis (A18.0†)
M68.8* Other disorders of synovium and tendon in diseases classified elsewhere
537
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M70
Other soft tissue disorders
(M70-M79)
M70
Soft tissue disorders related to use, overuse and pressure
Includes:
Excludes:
soft tissue disorders of occupational origin
bursitis (of):
•
NOS (M71.9)
•
shoulder (M75.5)
decubitus ulcer and pressure area (L89.-)
enthesopathies (M76-M77)
M70.0 Chronic crepitant synovitis of hand and wrist
M70.1 Bursitis of hand
M70.2 Olecranon bursitis
M70.3 Other bursitis of elbow
M70.4 Prepatellar bursitis
M70.5 Other bursitis of knee
M70.6 Trochanteric bursitis
     Includes:
    Trochanteric tendinitis
M70.7 Other bursitis of hip
     Includes:
    Ischial bursitis
M70.8 Other soft tissue disorders related to use, overuse and pressure
M70.9 Unspecified soft tissue disorder related to use, overuse and pressure
M71
Other bursopathies
Excludes:
bunion (M20.1)
bursitis related to use, overuse and pressure (M70.-)
enthesopathies (M76-M77)
M71.0 Abscess of bursa
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M71.00 Abscess of bursa, multiple sites
M71.01 Abscess of bursa, shoulder region
M71.02 Abscess of bursa, upper arm
M71.03 Abscess of bursa, forearm
M71.04 Abscess of bursa, hand
M71.05 Abscess of bursa, pelvic region and thigh
M71.06 Abscess of bursa, lower leg
M71.07 Abscess of bursa, ankle and foot
M71.08 Abscess of bursa, other site
M71.09 Abscess of bursa, unspecified site
M71.1 Other infective bursitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M71.10 Other infective bursitis, multiple sites
M71.11 Other infective bursitis, shoulder region
M71.12 Other infective bursitis, upper arm
M71.13 Other infective bursitis, forearm
M71.14 Other infective bursitis, hand
M71.15 Other infective bursitis, pelvic region and thigh
538
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M71.16 Other infective bursitis, lower leg
M71.17 Other infective bursitis, ankle and foot
M71.18 Other infective bursitis, other site
M71.19 Other infective bursitis, unspecified site
M71.2 Synovial cyst of popliteal space [Baker]
     Excludes:
    with rupture (M66.0)
M71.3 Other bursal cyst
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Synovial cyst NOS
 Excludes:
synovial cyst with rupture (M66.1)
M71.30 Other bursal cyst, multiple sites
M71.31 Other bursal cyst, shoulder region
M71.32 Other bursal cyst, upper arm
M71.33 Other bursal cyst, forearm
M71.34 Other bursal cyst, hand
M71.35 Other bursal cyst, pelvic region and thigh
M71.36 Other bursal cyst, lower leg
M71.37 Other bursal cyst, ankle and foot
M71.38 Other bursal cyst, other site
M71.39 Other bursal cyst, unspecified site
M71.4 Calcium deposit in bursa
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  of shoulder (M75.3)
M71.40 Calcium deposit in bursa, multiple sites
M71.41 Calcium deposit in bursa, shoulder region
M71.42 Calcium deposit in bursa, upper arm
M71.43 Calcium deposit in bursa, forearm
M71.44 Calcium deposit in bursa, hand
M71.45 Calcium deposit in bursa, pelvic region and thigh
M71.46 Calcium deposit in bursa, lower leg
M71.47 Calcium deposit in bursa, ankle and foot
M71.48 Calcium deposit in bursa, other site
M71.49 Calcium deposit in bursa, unspecified site
M71.5 Other bursitis, not elsewhere classified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  bursitis (of):
 •
  NOS (M71.9)
 •
  shoulder (M75.5)
 •
  tibial collateral [Pellegrini-Stieda] (M76.4)
M71.50 Other bursitis, not elsewhere classified, multiple sites
M71.51 Other bursitis, not elsewhere classified, shoulder region
M71.52 Other bursitis, not elsewhere classified, upper arm
M71.53 Other bursitis, not elsewhere classified, forearm
M71.54 Other bursitis, not elsewhere classified, hand
M71.55 Other bursitis, not elsewhere classified, pelvic region and thigh
M71.55
539
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M71.56 
M71.56
Other bursitis, not elsewhere classified, lower leg
M71.57 Other bursitis, not elsewhere classified, ankle and foot
M71.58 Other bursitis, not elsewhere classified, other site
M71.59 Other bursitis, not elsewhere classified, unspecified site
M71.8 Other specified bursopathies
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M71.80 Other specified bursopathies, multiple sites
M71.81 Other specified bursopathies, shoulder region
M71.82 Other specified bursopathies, upper arm
M71.83 Other specified bursopathies, forearm
M71.84 Other specified bursopathies, hand
M71.85 Other specified bursopathies, pelvic region and thigh
M71.86 Other specified bursopathies, lower leg
M71.87 Other specified bursopathies, ankle and foot
M71.88 Other specified bursopathies, other site
M71.89 Other specified bursopathies, unspecified site
M71.9 Bursopathy, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Bursitis NOS
M71.90 Bursopathy, unspecified, multiple sites
M71.91 Bursopathy, unspecified, shoulder region
M71.92 Bursopathy, unspecified, upper arm
M71.93 Bursopathy, unspecified, forearm
M71.94 Bursopathy, unspecified, hand
M71.95 Bursopathy, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M71.96 Bursopathy, unspecified, lower leg
M71.97 Bursopathy, unspecified, ankle and foot
M71.98 Bursopathy, unspecified, other site
M71.99 Bursopathy unspecified, unspecified site
M72
Fibroblastic disorders
Excludes:
retroperitoneal fibromatosis (D48.3)
M72.0 Palmar fascial fibromatosis [Dupuytren]
     Excludes:
    that associated with diabetes mellitus (E10.60/M73.8*) (E11.60/M73.8*) (E13.60/M73.8*)
   (E14.60/M73.8*)
M72.1 Knuckle pads
M72.2 Plantar fascial fibromatosis
     Includes:
    Plantar fasciitis
M72.4 Pseudosarcomatous fibromatosis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Nodular fasciitis
M72.40 Pseudosarcomatous fibromatosis, multiple sites
M72.41 Pseudosarcomatous fibromatosis, shoulder region
M72.42 Pseudosarcomatous fibromatosis, upper arm
M72.43 Pseudosarcomatous fibromatosis, forearm
540
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M72.44 Pseudosarcomatous fibromatosis, hand
M72.45 Pseudosarcomatous fibromatosis, pelvic region and thigh
M72.46 Pseudosarcomatous fibromatosis, lower leg
M72.47 Pseudosarcomatous fibromatosis, ankle and foot
M72.48 Pseudosarcomatous fibromatosis, other site
M72.49 Pseudosarcomatous fibromatosis, unspecified site
M72.6 Necrotizing fasciitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth characters .68 to classify any associated
  diabetes mellitus.
 Use additional code (B95-B96) to identify infectious agent.
M72.60 Necrotizing fasciitis, multiple sites
M72.61 Necrotizing fasciitis, shoulder region
M72.62 Necrotizing fasciitis, upper arm
M72.63 Necrotizing fasciitis, forearm
M72.64 Necrotizing fasciitis, hand
M72.65 Necrotizing fasciitis, pelvic region and thigh
M72.66 Necrotizing fasciitis, lower leg
M72.67 Necrotizing fasciitis, ankle and foot
M72.68 Necrotizing fasciitis, other site
M72.69 Necrotizing fasciitis, unspecified site
M72.8 Other fibroblastic disorders
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Abscess of fascia
 Excludes:
fasciitis:
•
 diffuse (eosinophilic)(M35.4)
•
 necrotizing(M72.6)
•
 nodular(M72.4)
•
 perirenal:
•
 NOS (N13.5)
•
 with infection (N13.6)
•
 plantar (M72.2)
M72.80 Other fibroblastic disorders, multiple sites
M72.81 Other fibroblastic disorders, shoulder region
M72.82 Other fibroblastic disorders, upper arm
M72.83 Other fibroblastic disorders, forearm
M72.84 Other fibroblastic disorders, hand
M72.85 Other fibroblastic disorders, pelvic region and thigh
M72.86 Other fibroblastic disorders, lower leg
M72.87 Other fibroblastic disorders, ankle and foot
M72.88 Other fibroblastic disorders, other site
M72.89 Other fibroblastic disorders, unspecified site
M72.9 Fibroblastic disorder, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Fasciitis NOS
 Fibromatosis NOS
M72.90 Fibroblastic disorder, unspecified, multiple sites
M72.90
541
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M72.91 
M72.91
Fibroblastic disorder, unspecified, shoulder region
M72.92 Fibroblastic disorder, unspecified, upper arm
M72.93 Fibroblastic disorder, unspecified, forearm
M72.94 Fibroblastic disorder, unspecified, hand
M72.95 Fibroblastic disorder, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M72.96 Fibroblastic disorder, unspecified, lower leg
M72.97 Fibroblastic disorder, unspecified, ankle and foot
M72.98 Fibroblastic disorder, unspecified, other site
M72.99 Fibroblastic disorder unspecified, unspecified site
M73*
Soft tissue disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
M73.0* Gonococcal bursitis (A54.4†)
M73.1* Syphilitic bursitis (A52.7†)
M73.8* Other soft tissue disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
M75
Shoulder lesions
Excludes:
shoulder-hand syndrome (M89.0)
M75.0 Adhesive capsulitis of shoulder
     Includes:
    Frozen shoulder
   Periarthritis of shoulder
  Excludes:
 that associated with diabetes mellitus (E10.60/M14.2*) (E11.60/M14.2*) (E13.60/M14.2*)
(E14.60/M14.2*)
M75.1 Rotator cuff syndrome
     Includes:
    Rotator cuff or supraspinatus tear or rupture (complete)(incomplete), not specified as traumatic
   Supraspinatus syndrome
M75.2 Bicipital tendinitis
M75.3 Calcific tendinitis of shoulder
     Includes:
    Calcified bursa of shoulder
M75.4 Impingement syndrome of shoulder
M75.5 Bursitis of shoulder
M75.8 Other shoulder lesions
M75.9 Shoulder lesion, unspecified site
M76
Enthesopathies of lower limb, excluding foot
Note:
Excludes:
The superficially specific terms bursitis, capsulitis and tendinitis tend to be used indiscriminately
for various disorders of peripheral ligamentous or muscular attachments; most of these
conditions have been brought together as enthesopathies which is the generic term for lesions at
these sites.
bursitis due to use, overuse and pressure (M70.-)
M76.0 Gluteal tendinitis
M76.1 Psoas tendinitis
M76.2 Iliac crest spur
M76.3 Iliotibial band syndrome
M76.4 Tibial collateral bursitis [Pellegrini-Stieda]
M76.5 Patellar tendinitis
M76.6 Achilles tendinitis
     Includes:
    Achilles bursitis
542
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M76.7 Peroneal tendinitis
M76.8 Other enthesopathies of lower limb, excluding foot
     Includes:
    Anterior tibial syndrome
   Posterior tibial tendinitis
M76.9 Enthesopathy of lower limb, unspecified site
M77
M79.11
Other enthesopathies
Excludes:
bursitis:
•
NOS (M71.9)
•
due to use, overuse and pressure (M70.-)
osteophyte (M25.7)
spinal enthesopathy (M46.0)
M77.0 Medial epicondylitis
M77.1 Lateral epicondylitis
     Includes:
    Tennis elbow
M77.2 Periarthritis of wrist
M77.3 Calcaneal spur
M77.4 Metatarsalgia
     Excludes:
    Morton's metatarsalgia (G57.6)
M77.5 Other enthesopathy of foot
M77.8 Other enthesopathies, NEC
M77.9 Enthesopathy, unspecified site
     Includes:
    Bone spur NOS
   Capsulitis NOS
  Periarthritis NOS
 Tendinitis NOS
M79
Other soft tissue disorders, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
soft tissue pain, psychogenic (F45.4)
M79.0 Rheumatism, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter XIII]
   Excludes:
  fibromyalgia (M79.7)
 palindromic rheumatism (M12.3)
M79.00 Rheumatism, unspecified, multiple sites
M79.01 Rheumatism, unspecified shoulder region
M79.02 Rheumatism, unspecified, upper arm
M79.03 Rheumatism, unspecified, forearm
M79.04 Rheumatism, unspecified, hand
M79.05 Rheumatism, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M79.06 Rheumatism, unspecified, lower leg
M79.07 Rheumatism, unspecified, ankle and foot
M79.08 Rheumatism, unspecified, other site
M79.09 Rheumatism, unspecified, unspecified site
M79.1 Myalgia
     Note:
    Excludes:
[To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
myositis (M60.-)
M79.10 Myalgia, multiple sites
M79.11 Myalgia, shoulder region
543
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M79.12 
M79.12
Myalgia, upper arm
M79.13 Myalgia, forearm
M79.14 Myalgia, hand
M79.15 Myalgia, pelvic region and thigh
M79.16 Myalgia, lower leg
M79.17 Myalgia, ankle and foot
M79.18 Myalgia, other site
M79.19 Myalgia, unspecified site
M79.2 Neuralgia and neuritis, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  mononeuropathies (G56-G58)
 radiculitis:
•
 NOS (M54.1)
•
 brachial NOS (M54.1)
•
 lumbosacral NOS (M54.1)
sciatica (M54.3- M54.4)
M79.20 Neuralgia and neuritis, unspecified, multiple sites
M79.21 Neuralgia and neuritis, unspecified, shoulder region
M79.22 Neuralgia and neuritis, unspecified, upper arm
M79.23 Neuralgia and neuritis, unspecified, forearm
M79.24 Neuralgia and neuritis, unspecified, hand
M79.25 Neuralgia and neuritis, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M79.26 Neuralgia and neuritis, unspecified, lower leg
M79.27 Neuralgia and neuritis, unspecified, ankle and foot
M79.28 Neuralgia and neuritis, unspecified, other site
M79.29 Neuralgia and neuritis, unspecified, unspecified site
M79.3 Panniculitis, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  panniculitis:
 •
  lupus (L93.2)
 •
  neck and back (M54.0)
 •
  relapsing [Weber-Christian] (M35.6)
M79.30 Panniculitis, unspecified, multiple sites
M79.31 Panniculitis, unspecified, shoulder region
M79.32 Panniculitis, unspecified, upper arm
M79.33 Panniculitis, unspecified, forearm
M79.34 Panniculitis, unspecified, hand
M79.35 Panniculitis, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M79.36 Panniculitis, unspecified, lower leg
M79.37 Panniculitis, unspecified, ankle and foot
M79.38 Panniculitis, unspecified, other site
M79.39 Panniculitis, unspecified, unspecified site
M79.4 Hypertrophy of (infrapatellar) fat pad
544
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M79.5
Residual foreign body in soft tissue
Note:
[To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
Excludes:
foreign body of granuloma of:
•
skin of the subcutaneous tissue (L92.3)
•
soft tissue (M60.2)
M79.50 Residual foreign body in soft tissue, multiple sites
M79.51 Residual foreign body in soft tissue, shoulder region
M79.52 Residual foreign body in soft tissue, upper arm
M79.53 Residual foreign body in soft tissue, forearm
M79.54 Residual foreign body in soft tissue, hand
M79.55 Residual foreign body in soft tissue, pelvic region and thigh
M79.56 Residual foreign body in soft tissue, lower leg
M79.57 Residual foreign body in soft tissue, ankle and foot
M79.58 Residual foreign body in soft tissue, other site
M79.59 Residual foreign body in soft tissue, unspecified site
M79.6 Pain in limb
M79.60o Pain in upper limb
M79.61o Pain in lower limb
M79.69o Pain in unspecified limb
M79.7 Fibromyalgia
     Includes:
    Fibromyositis
   Fibrositis
  Myofibrositis
M79.8 Other specified soft tissue disorders
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M79.80 Other specified soft tissue disorders, multiple sites
M79.81 Other specified soft tissue disorders, shoulder region
M79.82 Other specified soft tissue disorders, upper arm
M79.83 Other specified soft tissue disorders, forearm
M79.84 Other specified soft tissue disorders, hand
M79.85 Other specified soft tissue disorders, pelvic region and thigh
M79.86 Other specified soft tissue disorders, lower leg
M79.87 Other specified soft tissue disorders, ankle and foot
M79.88 Other specified soft tissue disorders, other site
M79.89 Other specified soft tissue disorders, unspecified site
M79.9 Soft tissue disorder, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M79.90 Soft tissue disorder, unspecified, multiple sites
M79.91 Soft tissue disorder, unspecified, shoulder region
M79.92 Soft tissue disorder, unspecified, upper arm
M79.93 Soft tissue disorder, unspecified, forearm
M79.94 Soft tissue disorder, unspecified, hand
M79.95 Soft tissue disorder, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M79.96 Soft tissue disorder, unspecified, lower leg
M79.97 
M79.97
Soft tissue disorder, unspecified, ankle and foot
545
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M79.98 
M79.98
Soft tissue disorder, unspecified, other site
M79.99 Soft tissue disorder, unspecified, unspecified site
Osteopathies and chondropathies
(M80-M94)
Disorders of bone density and structure
(M80-M85)
M80
Osteoporosis with pathological fracture
Includes:
Excludes:
osteoporotic vertebral collapse and wedging
collapsed vertebra NOS (M48.5)
pathological fracture NOS (M84.4)
wedging of vertebra NOS (M48.5)
M80.0 Postmenopausal osteoporosis with pathological fracture
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M80.00 Postmenopausal osteoporosis with pathological fracture, multiple sites
M80.01 Postmenopausal osteoporosis with pathological fracture, shoulder region
M80.02 Postmenopausal osteoporosis with pathological fracture, upper arm
M80.03 Postmenopausal osteoporosis with pathological fracture, forearm
M80.04 Postmenopausal osteoporosis with pathological fracture, hand
M80.05 Postmenopausal osteoporosis with pathological fracture, pelvic region and thigh
M80.06 Postmenopausal osteoporosis with pathological fracture, lower leg
M80.07 Postmenopausal osteoporosis with pathological fracture, ankle and foot
M80.08 Postmenopausal osteoporosis with pathological fracture, other site
M80.09 Postmenopausal osteoporosis with pathological fracture, unspecified site
M80.1 Postoophorectomy osteoporosis with pathological fracture
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M80.10 Postoophorectomy osteoporosis with pathological fracture, multiple sites
M80.11 Postoophorectomy osteoporosis with pathological fracture, shoulder region
M80.12 Postoophorectomy osteoporosis with pathological fracture, upper arm
M80.13 Postoophorectomy osteoporosis with pathological fracture, forearm
M80.14 Postoophorectomy osteoporosis with pathological fracture, hand
M80.15 Postoophorectomy osteoporosis with pathological fracture, pelvic region and thigh
M80.16 Postoophorectomy osteoporosis with pathological fracture, lower leg
M80.17 Postoophorectomy osteoporosis with pathological fracture, ankle and foot
M80.18 Postoophorectomy osteoporosis with pathological fracture, other site
M80.19 Postoophorectomy osteoporosis with pathological fracture, unspecified site
M80.2 Osteoporosis of disuse with pathological fracture
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M80.20 Osteoporosis of disuse with pathological fracture, multiple sites
M80.21 Osteoporosis of disuse with pathological fracture, shoulder region
M80.22 Osteoporosis of disuse with pathological fracture, upper arm
M80.23 Osteoporosis of disuse with pathological fracture, forearm
546
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M80.24 Osteoporosis of disuse with pathological fracture, hand
M80.25 Osteoporosis of disuse with pathological fracture, pelvic region and thigh
M80.26 Osteoporosis of disuse with pathological fracture, lower leg
M80.27 Osteoporosis of disuse with pathological fracture, ankle and foot
M80.28 Osteoporosis of disuse with pathological fracture, other site
M80.29 Osteoporosis of disuse with pathological fracture, unspecified site
M80.3 Postsurgical malabsorption osteoporosis with pathological fracture
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M80.30 Postsurgical malabsorption osteoporosis with pathological fracture, multiple sites
M80.31 Postsurgical malabsorption osteoporosis with pathological fracture, shoulder region
M80.32 Postsurgical malabsorption osteoporosis with pathological fracture, upper arm
M80.33 Postsurgical malabsorption osteoporosis with pathological fracture, forearm
M80.34 Postsurgical malabsorption osteoporosis with pathological fracture, hand
M80.35 Postsurgical malabsorption osteoporosis with pathological fracture, pelvic region and thigh
M80.36 Postsurgical malabsorption osteoporosis with pathological fracture, lower leg
M80.37 Postsurgical malabsorption osteoporosis with pathological fracture, ankle and foot
M80.38 Postsurgical malabsorption osteoporosis with pathological fracture, other site
M80.39 Postsurgical malabsorption osteoporosis with pathological fracture, unspecified site
M80.4 Drug-induced osteoporosis with pathological fracture
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
M80.40 Drug-induced osteoporosis with pathological fracture, multiple sites
M80.41 Drug-induced osteoporosis with pathological fracture, shoulder region
M80.42 Drug-induced osteoporosis with pathological fracture, upper arm
M80.43 Drug-induced osteoporosis with pathological fracture, forearm
M80.44 Drug-induced osteoporosis with pathological fracture, hand
M80.45 Drug-induced osteoporosis with pathological fracture, pelvic region and thigh
M80.46 Drug-induced osteoporosis with pathological fracture, lower leg
M80.47 Drug-induced osteoporosis with pathological fracture, ankle and foot
M80.48 Drug-induced osteoporosis with pathological fracture, other site
M80.49 Drug-induced osteoporosis with pathological fracture, unspecified site
M80.5 Idiopathic osteoporosis with pathological fracture
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M80.50 Idiopathic osteoporosis with pathological fracture, multiple sites
M80.51 Idiopathic osteoporosis with pathological fracture, shoulder region
M80.52 Idiopathic osteoporosis with pathological fracture, upper arm
M80.53 Idiopathic osteoporosis with pathological fracture, forearm
M80.54 Idiopathic osteoporosis with pathological fracture, hand
M80.55 Idiopathic osteoporosis with pathological fracture, pelvic region and thigh
M80.56 Idiopathic osteoporosis with pathological fracture, lower leg
M80.57 Idiopathic osteoporosis with pathological fracture, ankle and foot
M80.58 Idiopathic osteoporosis with pathological fracture, other site
M80.59 Idiopathic osteoporosis with pathological fracture, unspecified site
M80.59
547
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M80.8 
M80.8
Other osteoporosis with pathological fracture
Note:
[To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M80.80 Other osteoporosis with pathological fracture, multiple sites
M80.81 Other osteoporosis with pathological fracture, shoulder region
M80.82 Other osteoporosis with pathological fracture, upper arm
M80.83 Other osteoporosis with pathological fracture, forearm
M80.84 Other osteoporosis with pathological fracture, hand
M80.85 Other osteoporosis with pathological fracture, pelvic region and thigh
M80.86 Other osteoporosis with pathological fracture, lower leg
M80.87 Other osteoporosis with pathological fracture, ankle and foot
M80.88 Other osteoporosis with pathological fracture, other site
M80.89 Other osteoporosis with pathological fracture, unspecified site
M80.9 Unspecified osteoporosis with pathological fracture
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M80.90 Unspecified osteoporosis with pathological fracture, multiple sites
M80.91 Unspecified osteoporosis with pathological fracture, shoulder region
M80.92 Unspecified osteoporosis with pathological fracture, upper arm
M80.93 Unspecified osteoporosis with pathological fracture, forearm
M80.94 Unspecified osteoporosis with pathological fracture, hand
M80.95 Unspecified osteoporosis with pathological fracture, pelvic region and thigh
M80.96 Unspecified osteoporosis with pathological fracture, lower leg
M80.97 Unspecified osteoporosis with pathological fracture, ankle and foot
M80.98 Unspecified osteoporosis with pathological fracture, other site
M80.99 Unspecified osteoporosis with pathological fracture, unspecified site
M81
Osteoporosis without pathological fracture
Excludes:
osteoporosis with pathological fracture (M80.-)
M81.0 Postmenopausal osteoporosis
M81.1 Postoophorectomy osteoporosis
M81.2 Osteoporosis of disuse
     Excludes:
    Sudeck's atrophy (M89.0)
M81.3 Postsurgical malabsorption osteoporosis
M81.4 Drug-induced osteoporosis
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
M81.5 Idiopathic osteoporosis
M81.6 Localized osteoporosis [Lequesne]
     Excludes:
    Sudeck's atrophy (M89.0)
M81.8 Other osteoporosis
     Includes:
    Senile osteoporosis
M81.9 Osteoporosis, unspecified
M82*
Osteoporosis in diseases classified elsewhere
M82.0* Osteoporosis in multiple myelomatosis (C90.0†)
M82.1* Osteoporosis in endocrine disorders (E00-E34†)
M82.8* Osteoporosis in other diseases classified elsewhere
548
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M83
Adult osteomalacia
Excludes:
osteomalacia:
•
infantile and juvenile (E55.0)
•
vitamin-D-resistant (E83.3)
renal osteodystrophy (N25.0)
rickets:
•
(active) (E55.0)
•
sequelae (E64.3)
•
vitamin-D-resistant (E83.3)
M83.0 Puerperal osteomalacia
M83.1 Senile osteomalacia
M83.2 Adult osteomalacia due to malabsorption
     Includes:
    Postsurgical malabsorption osteomalacia in adults
M83.3 Adult osteomalacia due to malnutrition
M83.4 Aluminium bone disease
M83.5 Other drug-induced osteomalacia in adults
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
M83.8 Other adult osteomalacia
M83.9 
M84.19
Adult osteomalacia, unspecified
M84
Disorders of continuity of bone
M84.0 Malunion of fracture
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M84.00 Malunion of fracture, multiple sites
M84.01 Malunion of fracture, shoulder region
M84.02 Malunion of fracture, upper arm
M84.03 Malunion of fracture, forearm
M84.04 Malunion of fracture, hand
M84.05 Malunion of fracture, pelvic region and thigh
M84.06 Malunion of fracture, lower leg
M84.07 Malunion of fracture, ankle and foot
M84.08 Malunion of fracture, other site
M84.09 Malunion of fracture, unspecified site
M84.1 Nonunion of fracture [pseudarthrosis]
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  pseudarthrosis after fusion or arthrodesis (M96.0)
M84.10 Nonunion of fracture [pseudarthrosis], multiple sites
M84.11 Nonunion of fracture [pseudarthrosis], shoulder region
M84.12 Nonunion of fracture [pseudarthrosis], upper arm
M84.13 Nonunion of fracture [pseudarthrosis], forearm
M84.14 Nonunion of fracture [pseudarthrosis], hand
M84.15 Nonunion of fracture [pseudarthrosis], pelvic region and thigh
M84.16 Nonunion of fracture [pseudarthrosis], lower leg
M84.17 Nonunion of fracture [pseudarthrosis], ankle and foot
M84.18 Nonunion of fracture [pseudarthrosis], other site
M84.19 Nonunion of fracture [pseudarthrosis], unspecified site
549
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M84.2 
M84.2
Delayed union of fracture
Note:
[To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M84.20 Delayed union of fracture, multiple sites
M84.21 Delayed union of fracture, shoulder region
M84.22 Delayed union of fracture, upper arm
M84.23 Delayed union of fracture, forearm
M84.24 Delayed union of fracture, hand
M84.25 Delayed union of fracture, pelvic region and thigh
M84.26 Delayed union of fracture, lower leg
M84.27 Delayed union of fracture, ankle and foot
M84.28 Delayed union of fracture, other site
M84.29 Delayed union of fracture, unspecified site
M84.3 Stress fracture, not elsewhere classified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Stress fracture NOS
 Excludes:
stress fracture of vertebra (M48.4)
M84.30 Stress fracture, not elsewhere classified, multiple sites
M84.31 Stress fracture, not elsewhere classified, shoulder region
M84.32 Stress fracture, not elsewhere classified, upper arm
M84.33 Stress fracture, not elsewhere classified, forearm
M84.34 Stress fracture, not elsewhere classified, hand
M84.35 Stress fracture, not elsewhere classified, pelvic region and thigh
M84.36 Stress fracture, not elsewhere classified, lower leg
M84.37 Stress fracture, not elsewhere classified, ankle and foot
M84.38 Stress fracture, not elsewhere classified, other site
M84.39 Stress fracture, not elsewhere classified, unspecified site
M84.4 Pathological fracture, not elsewhere classified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Pathological fracture, NOS
 Excludes:
collapsed vertebra NEC (M48.5)
pathological fracture in osteoporosis (M80-)
M84.40 Pathological fracture, not elsewhere classified, multiple sites
M84.41 Pathological fracture, not elsewhere classified, shoulder region
M84.42 Pathological fracture, not elsewhere classified, upper arm
M84.43 Pathological fracture, not elsewhere classified, forearm
M84.44 Pathological fracture, not elsewhere classified, hand
M84.45 Pathological fracture, not elsewhere classified, pelvic region and thigh
M84.46 Pathological fracture, not elsewhere classified, lower leg
M84.47 Pathological fracture, not elsewhere classified, ankle and foot
M84.48 Pathological fracture, not elsewhere classified, other site
M84.49 Pathological fracture, not elsewhere classified, unspecified site
M84.8 Other disorders of continuity of bone
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M84.80 Other disorders of continuity of bone, multiple sites
M84.81 Other disorders of continuity of bone, shoulder region
550
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M84.82 Other disorders of continuity of bone, upper arm
M84.83 Other disorders of continuity of bone, forearm
M84.84 Other disorders of continuity of bone, hand
M84.85 Other disorders of continuity of bone, pelvic region and thigh
M84.86 Other disorders of continuity of bone, lower leg
M84.87 Other disorders of continuity of bone, ankle and foot
M84.88 Other disorders of continuity of bone, other site
M84.89 Other disorders of continuity of bone, unspecified site
M84.9 Disorder of continuity of bone, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M84.90 Disorder of continuity of bone, unspecified, multiple sites
M84.91 Disorder of continuity of bone, unspecified, shoulder region
M84.92 Disorder of continuity of bone, unspecified, upper arm
M84.93 Disorder of continuity of bone, unspecified, forearm
M84.94 Disorder of continuity of bone, unspecified, hand
M84.95 Disorder of continuity of bone, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M84.96 Disorder of continuity of bone, unspecified, lower leg
M84.97 Disorder of continuity of bone, unspecified, ankle and foot
M84.98 Disorder of continuity of bone, unspecified, other site
M84.99 Disorder of continuity of bone, unspecified, unspecified site
M85
M85.13
Other disorders of bone density and structure
Excludes:
osteogenesis imperfecta (Q78.0)
osteopetrosis (Q78.2)
osteopoikilosis (Q78.8)
polyostotic fibrous dysplasia (Q78.1)
M85.0 Fibrous dysplasia (monostotic)
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  fibrous dysplasia of jaw (K10.8)
M85.00 Fibrous dysplasia (monostotic), multiple sites
M85.01 Fibrous dysplasia (monostotic), shoulder region
M85.02 Fibrous dysplasia (monostotic), upper arm
M85.03 Fibrous dysplasia (monostotic), forearm
M85.04 Fibrous dysplasia (monostotic), hand
M85.05 Fibrous dysplasia (monostotic), pelvic region and thigh
M85.06 Fibrous dysplasia (monostotic), lower leg
M85.07 Fibrous dysplasia (monostotic), ankle and foot
M85.08 Fibrous dysplasia (monostotic), other site
M85.09 Fibrous dysplasia (monostotic), unspecified site
M85.1 Skeletal fluorosis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M85.10 Skeletal fluorosis, multiple sites
M85.11 Skeletal fluorosis, shoulder region
M85.12 Skeletal fluorosis, upper arm
M85.13 Skeletal fluorosis, forearm
551
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M85.14 
M85.14
Skeletal fluorosis, hand
M85.15 Skeletal fluorosis, pelvic region and thigh
M85.16 Skeletal fluorosis, lower leg
M85.17 Skeletal fluorosis, ankle and foot
M85.18 Skeletal fluorosis, other site
M85.19 Skeletal fluorosis, unspecified site
M85.2 Hyperostosis of skull
M85.3 Osteitis condensans
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M85.30 Osteitis condensans, multiple sites
M85.31 Osteitis condensans, shoulder region
M85.32 Osteitis condensans, upper arm
M85.33 Osteitis condensans, forearm
M85.34 Osteitis condensans, hand
M85.35 Osteitis condensans, pelvic region and thigh
M85.36 Osteitis condensans, lower leg
M85.37 Osteitis condensans, ankle and foot
M85.38 Osteitis condensans, other site
M85.39 Osteitis condensans, unspecified site
M85.4 Solitary bone cyst
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  solitary cyst of jaw (K09.1-K09.2)
M85.41 Solitary bone cyst, shoulder region
M85.42 Solitary bone cyst, upper arm
M85.43 Solitary bone cyst, forearm
M85.44 Solitary bone cyst, hand
M85.45 Solitary bone cyst, pelvic region and thigh
M85.46 Solitary bone cyst, lower leg
M85.47 Solitary bone cyst, ankle and foot
M85.48 Solitary bone cyst, other site
M85.49 Solitary bone cyst, unspecified site
M85.5 Aneurysmal bone cyst
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  aneurysmal cyst of jaw (K09.2)
M85.50 Aneurysmal bone cyst, multiple sites
M85.51 Aneurysmal bone cyst, shoulder region
M85.52 Aneurysmal bone cyst, upper arm
M85.53 Aneurysmal bone cyst, forearm
M85.54 Aneurysmal bone cyst, hand
M85.55 Aneurysmal bone cyst, pelvic region and thigh
M85.56 Aneurysmal bone cyst, lower leg
M85.57 Aneurysmal bone cyst, ankle and foot
M85.58 Aneurysmal bone cyst, other site
M85.59 Aneurysmal bone cyst, unspecified site
552
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M85.6
Other cyst of bone
Note:
[To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
Excludes:
cyst of jaw (K09.1-K09.2)
osteitis fibrosa cystica generalisata [von Recklinghausen's disease of bone] (E21.0)
M85.60 Other cyst of bone, multiple sites
M85.61 Other cyst of bone, shoulder region
M85.62 Other cyst of bone, upper arm
M85.63 Other cyst of bone, forearm
M85.64 Other cyst of bone, hand
M85.65 Other cyst of bone, pelvic region and thigh
M85.66 Other cyst of bone, lower leg
M85.67 Other cyst of bone, ankle and foot
M85.68 Other cyst of bone, other site
M85.69 Other cyst of bone, unspecified site
M85.8 Other specified disorders of bone density and structure
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter XIII]
   Includes:
  Hyperostosis of bones, except skull
 Osteosclerosis, acquired
Excludes:
diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis [DISH] (M48.1)
osteosclerosis:
•
 congenita (Q77.4)
•
 myelofibrosis (D75.8)
M85.80 Other specified disorders of bone density and structure, multiple sites
M85.81 Other specified disorders of bone density and structure, shoulder region
M85.82 Other specified disorders of bone density and structure, upper arm
M85.83 Other specified disorders of bone density and structure, forearm
M85.84 Other specified disorders of bone density and structure, hand
M85.85 Other specified disorders of bone density and structure, pelvic region and thigh
M85.86 Other specified disorders of bone density and structure, lower leg
M85.87 Other specified disorders of bone density and structure, ankle and foot
M85.88 Other specified disorders of bone density and structure, other site
M85.89 Other specified disorders of bone density and structure, unspecified site
M85.9 Disorder of bone density and structure, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M85.90 Disorder of bone density and structure, unspecified, multiple sites
M85.91 Disorder of bone density and structure, unspecified, shoulder region
M85.92 Disorder of bone density and structure, unspecified, upper arm
M85.93 Disorder of bone density and structure, unspecified, forearm
M85.94 Disorder of bone density and structure, unspecified, hand
M85.95 Disorder of bone density and structure, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M85.96 Disorder of bone density and structure, unspecified, lower leg
M85.97 Disorder of bone density and structure, unspecified, ankle and foot
M85.98 Disorder of bone density and structure, unspecified, other site
M85.99 
M85.99
Disorder of bone density and structure, unspecified, unspecified site
553
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M86
Other osteopathies
(M86-M90)
Excludes:
M86
postprocedural osteopathies (M96.-)
Osteomyelitis
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Excludes:
osteomyelitis (of):
•
due to salmonella (A02† M90.2*)
•
jaw (K10.2)
•
vertebra (M46.2)
M86.0 Acute haematogenous osteomyelitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M86.00 Acute haematogenous osteomyelitis, multiple sites
M86.01 Acute haematogenous osteomyelitis, shoulder region
M86.02 Acute haematogenous osteomyelitis, upper arm
M86.03 Acute haematogenous osteomyelitis, forearm
M86.04 Acute haematogenous osteomyelitis, hand
M86.05 Acute haematogenous osteomyelitis, pelvic region and thigh
M86.06 Acute haematogenous osteomyelitis, lower leg
M86.07 Acute haematogenous osteomyelitis, ankle and foot
M86.08 Acute haematogenous osteomyelitis, other site
M86.09 Acute haematogenous osteomyelitis, unspecified site
M86.1 Other acute osteomyelitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M86.10 Other acute osteomyelitis, multiple sites
M86.11 Other acute osteomyelitis, shoulder region
M86.12 Other acute osteomyelitis, upper arm
M86.13 Other acute osteomyelitis, forearm
M86.14 Other acute osteomyelitis, hand
M86.15 Other acute osteomyelitis, pelvic region and thigh
M86.16 Other acute osteomyelitis, lower leg
M86.17 Other acute osteomyelitis, ankle and foot
M86.18 Other acute osteomyelitis, other site
M86.19 Other acute osteomyelitis, unspecified site
M86.2 Subacute osteomyelitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M86.20 Subacute osteomyelitis, multiple sites
M86.21 Subacute osteomyelitis, shoulder region
M86.22 Subacute osteomyelitis, upper arm
M86.23 Subacute osteomyelitis, forearm
M86.24 Subacute osteomyelitis, hand
M86.25 Subacute osteomyelitis, pelvic region and thigh
M86.26 Subacute osteomyelitis, lower leg
M86.27 Subacute osteomyelitis, ankle and foot
M86.28 Subacute osteomyelitis, other site
554
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M86.29 Subacute osteomyelitis, unspecified site
M86.3 Chronic multifocal osteomyelitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M86.30 Chronic multifocal osteomyelitis, multiple sites
M86.31 Chronic multifocal osteomyelitis, shoulder region
M86.32 Chronic multifocal osteomyelitis, upper arm
M86.33 Chronic multifocal osteomyelitis, forearm
M86.34 Chronic multifocal osteomyelitis, hand
M86.35 Chronic multifocal osteomyelitis, pelvic region and thigh
M86.36 Chronic multifocal osteomyelitis, lower leg
M86.37 Chronic multifocal osteomyelitis, ankle and foot
M86.38 Chronic multifocal osteomyelitis, other site
M86.39 Chronic multifocal osteomyelitis, unspecified site
M86.4 Chronic osteomyelitis with draining sinus
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M86.40 Chronic osteomyelitis with draining sinus, multiple sites
M86.41 Chronic osteomyelitis with draining sinus, shoulder region
M86.42 Chronic osteomyelitis with draining sinus, upper arm
M86.43 Chronic osteomyelitis with draining sinus, forearm
M86.44 Chronic osteomyelitis with draining sinus, hand
M86.45 Chronic osteomyelitis with draining sinus, pelvic region and thigh
M86.46 Chronic osteomyelitis with draining sinus, lower leg
M86.47 Chronic osteomyelitis with draining sinus, ankle and foot
M86.48 Chronic osteomyelitis with draining sinus, other site
M86.49 Chronic osteomyelitis with draining sinus, unspecified site
M86.5 Other chronic haematogenous osteomyelitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M86.50 Other chronic haematogenous osteomyelitis, multiple sites
M86.51 Other chronic haematogenous osteomyelitis, shoulder region
M86.52 Other chronic haematogenous osteomyelitis, upper arm
M86.53 Other chronic haematogenous osteomyelitis, forearm
M86.54 Other chronic haematogenous osteomyelitis, hand
M86.55 Other chronic haematogenous osteomyelitis, pelvic region and thigh
M86.56 Other chronic haematogenous osteomyelitis, lower leg
M86.57 Other chronic haematogenous osteomyelitis, ankle and foot
M86.58 Other chronic haematogenous osteomyelitis, other site
M86.59 Other chronic haematogenous osteomyelitis, unspecified site
M86.6 Other chronic osteomyelitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M86.60 Other chronic osteomyelitis, multiple sites
M86.61 Other chronic osteomyelitis, shoulder region
M86.62 Other chronic osteomyelitis, upper arm
M86.63 Other chronic osteomyelitis, forearm
M86.64 Other chronic osteomyelitis, hand
M86.64
555
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M86.65 
M86.65
Other chronic osteomyelitis, pelvic region and thigh
M86.66 Other chronic osteomyelitis, lower leg
M86.67 Other chronic osteomyelitis, ankle and foot
M86.68 Other chronic osteomyelitis, other site
M86.69 Other chronic osteomyelitis, unspecified site
M86.8 Other osteomyelitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Brodie's abscess
M86.80 Other osteomyelitis, multiple sites
M86.81 Other osteomyelitis, shoulder region
M86.82 Other osteomyelitis, upper arm
M86.83 Other osteomyelitis, forearm
M86.84 Other osteomyelitis, hand
M86.85 Other osteomyelitis, pelvic region and thigh
M86.86 Other osteomyelitis, lower leg
M86.87 Other osteomyelitis, ankle and foot
M86.88 Other osteomyelitis, other site
M86.89 Other osteomyelitis, unspecified site
M86.9 Osteomyelitis, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Infection of bone NOS
 Periostitis without mention of osteomyelitis
M86.90 Osteomyelitis, unspecified, multiple sites
M86.91 Osteomyelitis, unspecified, shoulder region
M86.92 Osteomyelitis, unspecified, upper arm
M86.93 Osteomyelitis, unspecified, forearm
M86.94 Osteomyelitis, unspecified, hand
M86.95 Osteomyelitis, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M86.96 Osteomyelitis, unspecified, lower leg
M86.97 Osteomyelitis, unspecified, ankle and foot
M86.98 Osteomyelitis, unspecified, other site
M86.99 Osteomyelitis, unspecified, unspecified site
M87
Osteonecrosis
Includes:
Excludes:
avascular necrosis of bone
osteochondropathies (M91-M93)
M87.0 Idiopathic aseptic necrosis of bone
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M87.00 Idiopathic aseptic necrosis of bone, multiple sites
M87.01 Idiopathic aseptic necrosis of bone, shoulder region
M87.02 Idiopathic aseptic necrosis of bone, upper arm
M87.03 Idiopathic aseptic necrosis of bone, forearm
M87.04 Idiopathic aseptic necrosis of bone, hand
M87.05 Idiopathic aseptic necrosis of bone, pelvic region and thigh
M87.06 Idiopathic aseptic necrosis of bone, lower leg
556
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M87.07 Idiopathic aseptic necrosis of bone, ankle and foot
M87.08 Idiopathic aseptic necrosis of bone, other site
M87.09 Idiopathic aseptic necrosis of bone, unspecified site
M87.1 Osteonecrosis due to drugs
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
M87.10 Osteonecrosis due to drugs, multiple sites
M87.11 Osteonecrosis due to drugs, shoulder region
M87.12 Osteonecrosis due to drugs, upper arm
M87.13 Osteonecrosis due to drugs, forearm
M87.14 Osteonecrosis due to drugs, hand
M87.15 Osteonecrosis due to drugs, pelvic region and thigh
M87.16 Osteonecrosis due to drugs, lower leg
M87.17 Osteonecrosis due to drugs, ankle and foot
M87.18 Osteonecrosis due to drugs, other site
M87.19 Osteonecrosis due to drugs, unspecified site
M87.2 Osteonecrosis due to previous trauma
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M87.20 Osteonecrosis due to previous trauma, multiple sites
M87.21 Osteonecrosis due to previous trauma, shoulder region
M87.22 Osteonecrosis due to previous trauma, upper arm
M87.23 Osteonecrosis due to previous trauma, forearm
M87.24 Osteonecrosis due to previous trauma, hand
M87.25 Osteonecrosis due to previous trauma, pelvic region and thigh
M87.26 Osteonecrosis due to previous trauma, lower leg
M87.27 Osteonecrosis due to previous trauma, ankle and foot
M87.28 Osteonecrosis due to previous trauma, other site
M87.29 Osteonecrosis due to previous trauma, unspecified site
M87.3 Other secondary osteonecrosis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M87.30 Other secondary osteonecrosis, multiple sites
M87.31 Other secondary osteonecrosis, shoulder region
M87.32 Other secondary osteonecrosis, upper arm
M87.33 Other secondary osteonecrosis, forearm
M87.34 Other secondary osteonecrosis, hand
M87.35 Other secondary osteonecrosis, pelvic region and thigh
M87.36 Other secondary osteonecrosis, lower leg
M87.37 Other secondary osteonecrosis, ankle and foot
M87.38 Other secondary osteonecrosis, other site
M87.39 Other secondary osteonecrosis, unspecified site
M87.8 Other osteonecrosis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M87.80 Other osteonecrosis, multiple sites
M87.81 Other osteonecrosis, shoulder region
M87.81
557
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M87.82 
M87.82
Other osteonecrosis, upper arm
M87.83 Other osteonecrosis, forearm
M87.84 Other osteonecrosis, hand
M87.85 Other osteonecrosis, pelvic region and thigh
M87.86 Other osteonecrosis, lower leg
M87.87 Other osteonecrosis, ankle and foot
M87.88 Other osteonecrosis, other site
M87.89 Other osteonecrosis, unspecified site
M87.9 Osteonecrosis, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M87.90 Osteonecrosis, unspecified, multiple sites
M87.91 Osteonecrosis, unspecified, shoulder region
M87.92 Osteonecrosis, unspecified, upper arm
M87.93 Osteonecrosis, unspecified, forearm
M87.94 Osteonecrosis, unspecified, hand
M87.95 Osteonecrosis, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M87.96 Osteonecrosis, unspecified, lower leg
M87.97 Osteonecrosis, unspecified, ankle and foot
M87.98 Osteonecrosis, unspecified, other site
M87.99 Osteonecrosis, unspecified, unspecified site
M88
Paget's disease of bone [osteitis deformans]
M88.0 Paget's disease of skull
M88.8 Paget's disease of other bones
M88.9 Paget's disease of bone, unspecified
M89
Other disorders of bone
M89.0 Algoneurodystrophy
M89.00o Complex Regional Pain Syndrome I [CRPS I], upper limb
       Includes:
      Shoulder-hand syndrome
     Sudeck's atrophy, upper limb
    Sympathetic reflex dystrophy, upper limb
M89.01o Complex Regional Pain Syndrome I [CRPS I], lower limb
       Includes:
      Sudeck's atrophy, lower limb
     Sympathetic reflex dystrophy, lower limb
M89.02o Complex Regional Pain Syndrome I [CRPS I], other and unspecified site
M89.09o Algoneurodystrophy, NOS
M89.1 Epiphyseal arrest
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M89.10 Epiphyseal arrest, multiple sites
M89.11 Epiphyseal arrest, shoulder region
M89.12 Epiphyseal arrest, upper arm
M89.13 Epiphyseal arrest, forearm
M89.14 Epiphyseal arrest, hand
M89.15 Epiphyseal arrest, pelvic region and thigh
558
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M89.16 Epiphyseal arrest, lower leg
M89.17 Epiphyseal arrest, ankle and foot
M89.18 Epiphyseal arrest, other site
M89.19 Epiphyseal arrest, unspecified site
M89.2 Other disorders of bone development and growth
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M89.20 Other disorders of bone development and growth, multiple sites
M89.21 Other disorders of bone development and growth, shoulder region
M89.22 Other disorders of bone development and growth, upper arm
M89.23 Other disorders of bone development and growth, forearm
M89.24 Other disorders of bone development and growth, hand
M89.25 Other disorders of bone development and growth, pelvic region and thigh
M89.26 Other disorders of bone development and growth, lower leg
M89.27 Other disorders of bone development and growth, ankle and foot
M89.28 Other disorders of bone development and growth, other site
M89.29 Other disorders of bone development and growth, unspecified site
M89.3 Hypertrophy of bone
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M89.30 Hypertrophy of bone, multiple sites
M89.31 Hypertrophy of bone, shoulder region
M89.32 Hypertrophy of bone, upper arm
M89.33 Hypertrophy of bone, forearm
M89.34 Hypertrophy of bone, hand
M89.35 Hypertrophy of bone, pelvic region and thigh
M89.36 Hypertrophy of bone, lower leg
M89.37 Hypertrophy of bone, ankle and foot
M89.38 Hypertrophy of bone, other site
M89.39 Hypertrophy of bone, unspecified site
M89.4 Other hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Marie-Bamberger disease
 Pachydermoperiostosis
M89.40 Other hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, multiple sites
M89.41 Other hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, shoulder region
M89.42 Other hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, upper arm
M89.43 Other hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, forearm
M89.44 Other hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, hand
M89.45 Other hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, pelvic region and thigh
M89.46 Other hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, lower leg
M89.47 Other hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, ankle and foot
M89.48 Other hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, other site
M89.49 Other hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, unspecified site
M89.5 Osteolysis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M89.5
559
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M89.50 
M89.50
Osteolysis, multiple sites
M89.51 Osteolysis, shoulder region
M89.52 Osteolysis, upper arm
M89.53 Osteolysis, forearm
M89.54 Osteolysis, hand
M89.55 Osteolysis, pelvic region and thigh
M89.56 Osteolysis, lower leg
M89.57 Osteolysis, ankle and foot
M89.58 Osteolysis, other site
M89.59 Osteolysis, unspecified site
M89.6 Osteopathy after poliomyelitis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Use additional code (B91) to identify previous poliomyelitis.
  Excludes:
 postpolio syndrome (G14)
M89.60 Osteopathy after poliomyelitis, multiple sites
M89.61 Osteopathy after poliomyelitis, shoulder region
M89.62 Osteopathy after poliomyelitis, upper arm
M89.63 Osteopathy after poliomyelitis, forearm
M89.64 Osteopathy after poliomyelitis, hand
M89.65 Osteopathy after poliomyelitis, pelvic region and thigh
M89.66 Osteopathy after poliomyelitis, lower leg
M89.67 Osteopathy after poliomyelitis, ankle and foot
M89.68 Osteopathy after poliomyelitis, other site
M89.69 Osteopathy after poliomyelitis, unspecified site
M89.8 Other specified disorders of bone
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Includes:
  Infantile cortical hyperostoses
 Post-traumatic subperiosteal ossification
M89.80 Other specified disorders of bone, multiple sites
M89.81 Other specified disorders of bone, shoulder region
M89.82 Other specified disorders of bone, upper arm
M89.83 Other specified disorders of bone, forearm
M89.84 Other specified disorders of bone, hand
M89.85 Other specified disorders of bone, pelvic region and thigh
M89.86 Other specified disorders of bone, lower leg
M89.87 Other specified disorders of bone, ankle and foot
M89.88 Other specified disorders of bone, other site
M89.89 Other specified disorders of bone, unspecified site
M89.9 Disorder of bone, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M89.90 Disorder of bone, unspecified, multiple sites
M89.91 Disorder of bone, unspecified, shoulder region
M89.92 Disorder of bone, unspecified, upper arm
M89.93 Disorder of bone, unspecified, forearm
560
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M89.94 Disorder of bone, unspecified, hand
M89.95 Disorder of bone, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M89.96 Disorder of bone, unspecified, lower leg
M89.97 Disorder of bone, unspecified, ankle and foot
M89.98 Disorder of bone, unspecified, other site
M89.99 Disorder of bone, unspecified, unspecified site
M90*
M91.9
Osteopathies in diseases classified elsewhere
M90.0* Tuberculosis of bone (A18.0†)
        Excludes:
       tuberculosis of spine (M49.0*)
M90.1* Periostitis in other infectious diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Secondary syphilitic periostitis (A51.4†)
M90.2* Osteopathy in other infectious diseases elsewhere
      Includes:
     Osteomyelitis:
    •
     echinococcal (B67.2†)
      •
       gonococcal (A54.4†)
        •
         salmonella (A02.2†)
          Syphilitic osteopathy or osteochondropathy (A50.5†,A52.7†)
M90.3* Osteonecrosis in caisson disease (T70.3†)
M90.4* Osteonecrosis due to haemoglobinopathy (D50-D64†)
M90.5* Osteonecrosis in other diseases classified elsewhere
M90.6* Osteitis deformans in neoplastic disease (C00-D48†)
M90.7* Fracture of bone in neoplastic disease (C00-D48†)
        Excludes:
       collapse of vertebra in neoplastic disease (M49.5*)
M90.8* Osteopathy in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Osteopathy in diabetes mellitus (E10-E14† with common fourth and fifth characters .60)
      Osteopathy in renal osteodystrophy (N25.0†)
Chondropathies
(M91-M94)
Excludes:
M91
postprocedural chondropathies (M96.-)
Juvenile osteochondrosis of hip and pelvis
Excludes:
slipped upper femoral epiphysis (nontraumatic) (M93.0)
M91.0 Juvenile osteochondrosis of pelvis
     Includes:
    Osteochondrosis (juvenile) of:
   •
    acetabulum
   •
    iliac crest [Buchanan]
   •
    ischiopubic synchondrosis [van Neck]
   •
    symphysis pubis [Pierson]
M91.1 Juvenile osteochondrosis of head of femur [Legg-Calvé-Perthes]
M91.2 Coxa plana
     Includes:
    Hip deformity due to previous juvenile osteochondrosis
M91.3 Pseudocoxalgia
M91.8 Other juvenile osteochondrosis of hip and pelvis
     Includes:
    Juvenile osteochondrosis after reduction of congenital dislocation of hip
M91.9 Juvenile osteochondrosis of hip and pelvis, unspecified
561
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M92
M92
Other juvenile osteochondrosis
M92.0 Juvenile osteochondrosis of humerus
     Includes:
    Osteochondrosis (juvenile) of:
   •
    capitulum of humerus [Panner]
   •
    head of humerus [Haas]
M92.1 Juvenile osteochondrosis of radius and ulna
     Includes:
    Osteochondrosis (juvenile) of:
   •
    lower ulna [Burns]
   •
    radial head [Brailsford]
M92.2 Juvenile osteochondrosis of hand
     Includes:
    Osteochondrosis (juvenile) of:
   •
    carpal lunate [Kienböck]
    •
     metacarpal heads [Mauclaire]
M92.3 Other juvenile osteochondrosis of upper limb
M92.4 Juvenile osteochondrosis of patella
     Includes:
    Osteochondrosis (juvenile) of:
   •
    primary patellar centre [Köhler]
    •
     secondary patellar centre [Sinding Larsen]
M92.5 Juvenile osteochondrosis of tibia and fibula
     Includes:
    Osteochondrosis (juvenile) of:
   •
    proximal tibia [Blount]
   •
    tibial tubercle [Osgood-Schlatter]
   Tibia vara
M92.6 Juvenile osteochondrosis of tarsus
     Includes:
    Osteochondrosis (juvenile) of:
   •
    calcaneum [Sever]
   •
    os tibiale externum [Haglund]
   •
    talus [Diaz]
   •
    tarsal navicular [Köhler]
M92.7 Juvenile osteochondrosis of metatarsus
     Includes:
    Osteochondrosis (juvenile) of:
   •
    fifth metatarsus [Iselin]
   •
    second metatarsus [Freiberg]
M92.8 Other specified juvenile osteochondrosis
     Includes:
    Calcaneal apophysitis
M92.9 Juvenile osteochondrosis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Apophysitis
   Epiphysitis
  specified as juvenile, of unspecified site
 Osteochondritis
Osteochondrosis
M93
Other osteochondropathies
Excludes:
osteochondrosis of spine (M42.-)
M93.0 Slipped upper femoral epiphysis (nontraumatic)
M93.1 Kienböck's disease of adults
      Includes:
     Adult osteochondrosis of carpal lunate
M93.2 Osteochondritis dissecans
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M93.20 Osteochondritis dissecans of multiple sites
M93.21 Osteochondritis dissecans, shoulder region
M93.22 Osteochondritis dissecans, upper arm
562
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M93.23 Osteochondritis dissecans, forearm
M93.24 Osteochondritis dissecans of hand
M93.25 Osteochondritis dissecans, pelvic region and thigh
M93.26 Osteochondritis dissecans, lower leg
M93.27 Osteochondritis dissecans, ankle and foot
M93.28 Osteochondritis dissecans of other site
M93.29 Osteochondritis dissecans of unspecified site
M93.8 Other specified osteochondropathies
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M93.80o Other specified osteochondropathies, multiple sites
M93.81o Other specified osteochondropathies, shoulder region
M93.82o Other specified osteochondropathies, upper arm
M93.83o Other specified osteochondropathies, forearm
M93.84o Other specified osteochondropathies, hand
M93.85o Other specified osteochondropathies, pelvic region and thigh
M93.86o Other specified osteochondropathies, lower leg
M93.88o Other specified osteochondropathies, ankle and foot
M93.89o Other specified osteochondropathies, unspecified site
M93.9 Osteochondropathy, unspecified
     Includes:
    Apophysitis
   Epiphysitis
  Osteochondritis
 Osteochondrosis
M94
M94.31
not specified as adult or juvenile, of unspecified site
Other disorders of cartilage
M94.0 Chondrocostal junction syndrome [Tietze]
     Includes:
    Costochondritis
M94.1 Relapsing polychondritis
M94.2 Chondromalacia
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
   Excludes:
  chondromalacia patellae (M22.4)
M94.20 Chondromalacia, multiple sites
M94.21 Chondromalacia, shoulder region
M94.22 Chondromalacia, upper arm
M94.23 Chondromalacia, forearm
M94.24 Chondromalacia, hand
M94.25 Chondromalacia, pelvic region and thigh
M94.27 Chondromalacia, ankle and foot
M94.28 Chondromalacia, other site
M94.29 Chondromalacia, unspecified site
M94.3 Chondrolysis
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M94.30 Chondrolysis, multiple sites
M94.31 Chondrolysis, shoulder region
563
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M94.32 
M94.32
Chondrolysis, upper arm
M94.33 Chondrolysis, forearm
M94.34 Chondrolysis, hand
M94.35 Chondrolysis, pelvic region and thigh
M94.36 Chondrolysis, lower leg
M94.37 Chondrolysis, ankle and foot
M94.38 Chondrolysis, other site
M94.39 Chondrolysis, unspecified site
M94.8 Other specified disorders of cartilage
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M94.80 Other specified disorders of cartilage, multiple sites
M94.81 Other specified disorders of cartilage, shoulder region
M94.82 Other specified disorders of cartilage, upper arm
M94.83 Other specified disorders of cartilage, forearm
M94.84 Other specified disorders of cartilage, hand
M94.85 Other specified disorders of cartilage, pelvic region and thigh
M94.86 Other specified disorders of cartilage, lower leg
M94.87 Other specified disorders of cartilage, ankle and foot
M94.88 Other specified disorders of cartilage, other site
M94.89 Other specified disorders of cartilage, unspecified site
M94.9 Disorder of cartilage, unspecified
     Note:
    [To review the anatomical site captured in the 5th character subclassification see Chapter 13]
M94.90 Disorder of cartilage, unspecified, multiple sites
M94.91 Disorder of cartilage, unspecified, shoulder region
M94.92 Disorder of cartilage, unspecified, upper arm
M94.93 Disorder of cartilage, unspecified, forearm
M94.94 Disorder of cartilage, unspecified, hand
M94.95 Disorder of cartilage, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M94.96 Disorder of cartilage, unspecified, lower leg
M94.97 Disorder of cartilage, unspecified, ankle and foot
M94.98 Disorder of cartilage, unspecified, other site
M94.99 Disorder of cartilage, unspecified, unspecified site
564
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
Other disorders of the musculoskeletal system and
connective tissue
(M95-M99)
M95
M96.9
Other acquired deformities of musculoskeletal system and connective tissue
Excludes:
acquired:
•
absence of limbs and organs (Z89-Z90)
•
deformities of limbs (M20-M21)
congenital malformations and deformations of the musculoskeletal system (Q65-Q79)
deforming dorsopathies (M40-M43)
dentofacial anomalies [including malocclusion] (K07.-)
postprocedural musculoskeletal disorders (M96.-)
M95.0 Acquired deformity of nose
     Excludes:
    deviated nasal septum (J34.2)
M95.1 Cauliflower ear
     Excludes:
    other acquired deformities of ear (H61.1)
M95.2 Other acquired deformity of head
M95.3 Acquired deformity of neck
M95.4 Acquired deformity of chest and rib
M95.5 Acquired deformity of pelvis
     Excludes:
    maternal care for known or suspected disproportion (O33.-)
M95.8 Other specified acquired deformities of musculoskeletal system
M95.9 Acquired deformity of musculoskeletal system, unspecified
M96
Postprocedural musculoskeletal disorders, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
arthropathy following intestinal bypass (M02.0)
disorders associated with osteoporosis (M80-M81)
presence of functional implants and other devices (Z95-Z97)
M96.0 Pseudarthrosis after fusion or arthrodesis
M96.1 Postlaminectomy syndrome, not elsewhere classified
M96.2 Postradiation kyphosis
M96.3 Postlaminectomy kyphosis
M96.4 Postsurgical lordosis
M96.5 Postradiation scoliosis
M96.6 Fracture of bone following insertion of orthopaedic implant, joint prosthesis, or bone plate
     Excludes:
    complication of internal orthopaedic devices, implants or grafts (T84.-)
M96.8 Other postprocedural musculoskeletal disorders
     Includes:
    Instability of joint secondary to removal of joint prosthesis
M96.9 Postprocedural musculoskeletal disorder, unspecified
565
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
M99
Biomechanical lesions, not elsewhere classified
Note:
M99
This category should not be used if the condition can be classified elsewhere.
The following fifth characters respresent the following sites of involvement:
0 Head region
occipitocervical
1 Cervical region
cervicothoracic
2 Thoracic region
thoracolumbar
3 Lumbar region
lumbosacral
4 Sacral region
sacrococcygeal, sacroiliac
5 Pelvic region
hip, pubic
6 Lower extremity
7 Upper extremity
acromioclavicular,sternoclavicular
8 Rib cage
costochondral, costovertebral, sternochondral
9 Abdomen and other
M99.0 Segmental and somatic dysfunction
M99.00 Segmental and somatic dysfunction, head region
M99.01 Segmental and somatic dysfunction, cervical region
M99.02 Segmental and somatic dysfunction, thoracic region
M99.03 Segmental and somatic dysfunction, lumbar region
M99.04 Segmental and somatic dysfunction, sacral region
M99.05 Segmental and somatic dysfunction, pelvic region
M99.06 Segmental and somatic dysfunction, lower extremity
M99.07 Segmental and somatic dysfunction, upper extremity
M99.08 Segmental and somatic dysfunction, rib cage
M99.09 Segmental and somatic dysfunction, abdomen and other sites
M99.1 Subluxation complex (vertebral)
M99.10 Subluxation complex (vertebral), head region
M99.11 Subluxation complex (vertebral), cervical region
M99.12 Subluxation complex (vertebral), thoracic region
M99.13 Subluxation complex (vertebral), lumbar region
M99.14 Subluxation complex (vertebral), sacral region
M99.15 Subluxation complex (vertebral), pelvic region
M99.2 Subluxation stenosis of neural canal
M99.20 Subluxation stenosis of neural canal, head region
M99.21 Subluxation stenosis of neural canal, cervical region
M99.22 Subluxation stenosis of neural canal, thoracic region
M99.23 Subluxation stenosis of neural canal, lumbar region
M99.24 Subluxation stenosis of neural canal, sacral region
M99.25 Subluxation stenosis of neural canal, pelvic region
M99.3 Osseous stenosis of neural canal
M99.30 Osseous stenosis of neural canal, head region
M99.31 Osseous stenosis of neural canal, cervical region
M99.32 Osseous stenosis of neural canal, thoracic region
M99.33 Osseous stenosis of neural canal, lumbar region
M99.34 Osseous stenosis of neural canal, sacral region
M99.35 Osseous stenosis of neural canal, pelvic region
M99.4 Connective tissue stenosis of neural canal
M99.40 Connective tissue stenosis of neural canal, head region
566
DISEASES OF THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE (M00-M99)
M99.41 Connective tissue stenosis of neural canal, cervical region
M99.42 Connective tissue stenosis of neural canal, thoracic region
M99.43 Connective tissue stenosis of neural canal, lumbar region
M99.44 Connective tissue stenosis of neural canal, sacral region
M99.45 Connective tissue stenosis of neural canal, pelvic region
M99.5 Intervertebral disc stenosis of neural canal
M99.50 Intervertebral disc stenosis of neural canal, head region
M99.51 Intervertebral disc stenosis of neural canal, cervical region
M99.52 Intervertebral disc stenosis of neural canal, thoracic region
M99.53 Intervertebral disc stenosis of neural canal, lumbar region
M99.54 Intervertebral disc stenosis of neural canal, sacral region
M99.6 Osseous and subluxation stenosis of intervertebral foramina
M99.60 Osseous and subluxation stenosis of intervertebral foramina, head region
M99.61 Osseous and subluxation stenosis of intervertebral foramina, cervical region
M99.62 Osseous and subluxation stenosis of intervertebral foramina, thoracic region
M99.63 Osseous and subluxation stenosis of intervertebral foramina, lumbar region
M99.64 Osseous and subluxation stenosis of intervertebral foramina, sacral region
M99.7 Connective tissue and disc stenosis of intervertebral foramina
M99.70 Connective tissue and disc stenosis of intervertebral foramina, head region
M99.71 Connective tissue and disc stenosis of intervertebral foramina, cervical region
M99.72 Connective tissue and disc stenosis of intervertebral foramina, thoracic region
M99.73 Connective tissue and disc stenosis of intervertebral foramina, lumbar region
M99.74 Connective tissue and disc stenosis of intervertebral foramina, sacral region
M99.8 Other biomechanical lesions
M99.80 Other biomechanical lesions, head region
M99.81 Other biomechanical lesions, cervical region
M99.82 Other biomechanical lesions, thoracic region
M99.83 Other biomechanical lesions, lumbar region
M99.84 Other biomechanical lesions, sacral region
M99.85 Other biomechanical lesions, pelvic region
M99.86 Other biomechanical lesions, lower extremity
M99.87 Other biomechanical lesions, upper extremity
M99.88 Other biomechanical lesions, rib cage
M99.89 Other biomechanical lesions, abdomen and other sites
M99.9 Biomechanical lesion, unspecified
M99.90 Biomechanical lesion, unspecified, head region
M99.91 Biomechanical lesion, unspecified, cervical region
M99.92 Biomechanical lesion, unspecified, thoracic region
M99.93 Biomechanical lesion, unspecified, lumbar region
M99.94 Biomechanical lesion, unspecified, sacral region
M99.95 Biomechanical lesion, unspecified, pelvic region
M99.96 Biomechanical lesion, unspecified, lower extremity
M99.97 Biomechanical lesion, unspecified, upper extremity
M99.98 Biomechanical lesion, unspecified, rib cage
M99.99 Biomechanical lesion, unspecified, abdomen and other sites
M99.99
567
I
CHAPTER XIV
Diseases of the genitourinary system
(N00-N99)
Excludes:
certain conditions originating in the perinatal period (P00-P96)
certain infectious and parasitic diseases (A00-B99)
complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O00-O99)
congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (Q00-Q99)
endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (E00-E90)
injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98)
neoplasms (C00-D48)
symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not elsewhere classified (R00-R99)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
N00-N08
N10-N16
N17-N19
N20-N23
N25-N29
N30-N39
N40-N51
N60-N64
N70-N77
N80-N98
N99-N99
Glomerular diseases
Renal tubulo-interstitial diseases
Renal failure
Urolithiasis
Other disorders of kidney and ureter
Other diseases of urinary system
Diseases of male genital organs
Disorders of breast
Inflammatory diseases of female pelvic organs
Noninflammatory disorders of female genital tract
Other disorders of the genitourinary system (N99)
Asterisk categories for this chapter are provided as follows:
N08*
N16*
N22*
N29*
N33*
N37*
N51*
N74*
N77*
Glomerular disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Calculus of urinary tract in diseases classified elsewhere
Other disorders of kidney and ureter in diseases classified elsewhere
Bladder disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Urethral disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Disorders of male genital organs in diseases classified elsewhere
Female pelvic inflammatory disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Vulvovaginal ulceration and inflammation in diseases classified elsewhere
569
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N00
Glomerular diseases
(N00-N08)
Note:
The following fourth-character subdivisions classify morphological changes and are for use with categories
N00 - N07. Subdivisions .0 - .8 should not normally be used unless these have been specifically identified
(e.g. by renal biopsy or autopsy). The three-character categories relate to clinical syndromes.
.0 Minor glomerular abnormality
Minimal change lesion
.1 Focal and segmental glomerular lesions
Glomerulonephritis
Hyalinosis
focal and segmental
Sclerosis
.2
.3
.4
.5
Diffuse membranous glomerulonephritis
Diffuse mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis
Diffuse endocapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis
Diffuse mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, types 1 and 3, or NOS
.6 Dense deposit disease
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, type 2
.7 Diffuse crescentic glomerulonephritis
Extracapillary glomerulonephritis
.8 Other
Proliferative glomerulonephritis NOS
.9Unspecified
Use additional code to identify associated chronic kidney disease (N18.-)
Use additional code to identify external cause (Chapter XX) or presence of renal failure, Acute (N17) or Unspecified (N19)
Excludes:
hypertensive renal disease (I12)
N00
Acute nephritic syndrome
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
See note under chapter heading (N00-N08) for fourth character subdivision.
acute:
•
glomerular disease
•
glomerulonephritis
•
nephritis
•
renal disease NOS
acute tubulo-interstitial nephritis (N10)
nephritic syndrome NOS (N05.-)
N00.0 Acute nephritic syndrome, minor glomerular abnormality
     Includes:
    Minimal change lesion
N00.1 Acute nephritic syndrome, focal and segmental glomerular lesions
     Includes:
    focal:
   •
    and segmental:
   •
    hyalinosis
   •
    sclerosis
   •
    glomerulonephritis
N00.2 Acute nephritic syndrome, diffuse membranous glomerulonephritis
N00.3 Acute nephritic syndrome, diffuse mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis
N00.4 Acute nephritic syndrome, diffuse endocapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis
N00.5 Acute nephritic syndrome, diffuse mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, types 1 and 3, or NOS
N00.6 Acute nephritic syndrome, dense deposit disease
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, type 2
570
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
N00.7 Acute nephritic syndrome, diffuse crescentic glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Extracapillary glomerulonephritis
N00.8 Acute nephritic syndrome, other
     Includes:
    Proliferative glomerulonephritis NOS
N00.9 Acute nephritic syndrome, unspecified
N01
N02.4
Rapidly progressive nephritic syndrome
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
See note under chapter heading (N00-N08) for fourth character subdivisions
rapidly progressive:
•
glomerular disease
•
glomerulonephritis
•
nephritis
nephritic syndrome NOS (N05.-)
N01.0 Rapidly progressive nephritic syndrome, minor glomerular abnormality
     Includes:
    Minimal change lesion
N01.1 Rapidly progressive nephritic syndrome, focal and segmental glomerular lesions
     Includes:
    focal:
   •
    and segmental:
   •
    hyalinosis
   •
    sclerosis
   •
    glomerulonephritis
N01.2 Rapidly progressive nephritic syndrome, diffuse membranous glomerulonephritis
N01.3 Rapidly progressive nephritic syndrome, diffuse mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis
N01.4 Rapidly progressive nephritic syndrome, diffuse endocapillary proliferative
     glomerulonephritis
N01.5 Rapidly progressive nephritic syndrome, diffuse mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, types 1 and 3, or NOS
N01.6 Rapidly progressive nephritic syndrome, dense deposit disease
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, type 2
N01.7 Rapidly progressive nephritic syndrome, diffuse crescentic glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Extracapillary glomerulonephritis
N01.8 Rapidly progressive nephritic syndrome, other
     Includes:
    Proliferative glomerulonephritis NOS
N01.9 Rapidly progressive nephritic syndrome, unspecified
N02
Recurrent and persistent haematuria
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
See note under chapter heading (N00-N08) for fourth character subdivisions
haematuria:
•
benign (familial)(of childhood)
•
with morphological lesion specified in .0 - .8 see note at block heading (N00-N08)
haematuria NOS (R31)
N02.0 Recurrent and persistent haematuria, minor glomerular abnormality
     Includes:
    Minimal change lesion
N02.1 Recurrent and persistent haematuria, focal and segmental glomerular lesions
     Includes:
    focal:
   •
    and segmental:
   •
    hyalinosis
   •
    sclerosis
   •
    glomerulonephritis
N02.2 Recurrent and persistent haematuria, diffuse membranous glomerulonephritis
N02.3 Recurrent and persistent haematuria, diffuse mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis
N02.4 Recurrent and persistent haematuria, diffuse endocapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis
571
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N02.5 
N02.5
Recurrent and persistent haematuria, diffuse mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
Includes:
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, types 1 and 3, or NOS
N02.6 Recurrent and persistent haematuria, dense deposit disease
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, type 2
N02.7 Recurrent and persistent haematuria, diffuse crescentic glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Extracapillary glomerulonephritis
N02.8 Recurrent and persistent haematuria, other
     Includes:
    Proliferative glomerulonephritis NOS
N02.9 Recurrent and persistent haematuria, unspecified
N03
Chronic nephritic syndrome
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
See note under chapter heading (N00-N08) for fourth character subdivisions
chronic:
•
glomerular disease
•
glomerulonephritis
•
nephritis
chronic tubulo-interstitial nephritis (N11.-)
diffuse sclerosing glomerulonephritis (N18.-)
nephritic syndrome NOS (N05.-)
N03.0 Chronic nephritic syndrome, minor glomerular abnormality
     Includes:
    Minimal change lesion
N03.1 Chronic nephritic syndrome, focal and segmental glomerular lesions
     Includes:
    focal:
   •
    and segmental:
   •
    hyalinosis
   •
    sclerosis
   •
    glomerulonephritis
N03.2 Chronic nephritic syndrome, diffuse membranous glomerulonephritis
N03.3 Chronic nephritic syndrome, diffuse mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis
N03.4 Chronic nephritic syndrome, diffuse endocapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis
N03.5 Chronic nephritic syndrome, diffuse mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, types 1 and 3, or NOS
N03.6 Chronic nephritic syndrome, dense deposit disease
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, type 2
N03.7 Chronic nephritic syndrome, diffuse crescentic glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Extracapillary glomerulonephritis
N03.8 Chronic nephritic syndrome, other
     Includes:
    Proliferative glomerulonephritis NOS
N03.9 Chronic nephritic syndrome, unspecified
N04
Nephrotic syndrome
Note:
Includes:
See note under chapter heading (N00-N08) for fourth character subdivisions
congenital nephrotic syndrome
lipoid nephrosis
N04.0 Nephrotic syndrome, minor glomerular abnormality
     Includes:
    Minimal change lesion
N04.1 Nephrotic syndrome, focal and segmental glomerular lesions
     Includes:
    focal:
   •
    and segmental:
   •
    hyalinosis
   •
    sclerosis
   •
    glomerulonephritis
572
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
N04.2 Nephrotic syndrome, diffuse membranous glomerulonephritis
N04.3 Nephrotic syndrome, diffuse mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis
N04.4 Nephrotic syndrome, diffuse endocapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis
N04.5 Nephrotic syndrome, diffuse mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, types 1 and 3, or NOS
N04.6 Nephrotic syndrome, dense deposit disease
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, type 2
N04.7 Nephrotic syndrome, diffuse crescentic glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Extracapillary glomerulonephritis
N04.8 Nephrotic syndrome, other
     Includes:
    Proliferative glomerulonephritis NOS
N04.9 Nephrotic syndrome, unspecified
N05
N05.9
Unspecified nephritic syndrome
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
See note under chapter heading (N00-N08) for fourth character subdivisions
glomerular disease NOS
glomerulonephritis NOS
nephritis NOS
nephropathy NOS and renal disease NOS with morphological lesion specified in .0-.8 in note a
block heading
nephropathy NOS with no stated morphological lesion (N28.9)
renal disease NOS with no stated morphological lesion (N28.9)
tubulo-interstitial nephritis NOS (N12)
N05.0 Unspecified nephritic syndrome, minor glomerular abnormality
     Includes:
    Minimal change lesion
N05.1 Unspecified nephritic syndrome, focal and segmental glomerular lesions
     Includes:
    focal:
   •
    and segmental:
   •
    hyalinosis
   •
    sclerosis
   •
    glomerulonephritis
N05.2 Unspecified nephritic syndrome, diffuse membranous glomerulonephritis
N05.3 Unspecified nephritic syndrome, diffuse mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis
N05.4 Unspecified nephritic syndrome, diffuse endocapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis
N05.5 Unspecified nephritic syndrome, diffuse mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, types 1 and 3, or NOS
N05.6 Unspecified nephritic syndrome, dense deposit disease
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, type 2
N05.7 Unspecified nephritic syndrome, diffuse crescentic glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Extracapillary glomerulonephritis
N05.8 Unspecified nephritic syndrome, other
     Includes:
    Proliferative glomerulonephritis NOS
N05.9 Unspecified nephritic syndrome, unspecified
573
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N06
Isolated proteinuria with specified morphological lesion
Note:
Includes:
N06
Excludes:
See note under chapter heading (N00-N08) for fourth character subdivisions
proteinuria (isolated)(orthostatic)(persistent) with morphological lesion specified in .0-.8 in note
at block heading
proteinuria:
•
NOS (R80)
•
Bence Jones (R80)
•
gestational (O12.1-)
•
isolated NOS (R80)
•
orthostatic NOS (N39.2)
•
persistent NOS (N39.1)
N06.0 Isolated proteinuria with minor glomerular abnormality
     Includes:
    Minimal change lesion
N06.1 Isolated proteinuria with focal and segmental glomerular lesions
     Includes:
    focal:
   •
    and segmental:
   •
    hyalinosis
   •
    sclerosis
   •
    glomerulonephritis
N06.2 Isolated proteinuria with diffuse membranous glomerulonephritis
N06.3 Isolated proteinuria with diffuse mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis
N06.4 Isolated proteinuria with diffuse endocapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis
N06.5 Isolated proteinuria with diffuse mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, types 1 and 3, or NOS
N06.6 Isolated proteinuria with dense deposit disease
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, type 2
N06.7 Isolated proteinuria with diffuse crescentic glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Extracapillary glomerulonephritis
N06.8 Isolated proteinuria with specified morphological lesion, other
     Includes:
    Proliferative glomerulonephritis NOS
N06.9 Isolated proteinuria with specified morphological lesion, unspecified
N07
Hereditary nephropathy, not elsewhere classified
Note:
Excludes:
See note under chapter heading (N00-N08) for fourth character subdivisions
Alport's syndrome (Q87.8)
hereditary amyloid nephropathy (E85.0)
nail patella syndrome (Q87.2)
non-neuropathic heredofamilial amyloidosis (E85.0)
N07.0 Hereditary nephropathy, not elsewhere classified, minor glomerular abnormality
     Includes:
    Minimal change lesion
N07.1 Hereditary nephropathy, not elsewhere classified, focal and segmental glomerular lesions
     Includes:
    focal:
   •
    and segmental:
   •
    hyalinosis
   •
    sclerosis
   •
    glomerulonephritis
N07.2 Hereditary nephropathy, not elsewhere classified, diffuse membranous glomerulonephritis
N07.3 Hereditary nephropathy, not elsewhere classified, diffuse mesangial proliferative
     glomerulonephritis
N07.4 Hereditary nephropathy, not elsewhere classified, diffuse endocapillary proliferative
     glomerulonephritis
574
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
N07.5
Hereditary nephropathy, not elsewhere classified, diffuse mesangiocapillary
glomerulonephritis
Includes:
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, types 1 and 3, or NOS
N07.6 Hereditary nephropathy, not elsewhere classified, dense deposit disease
     Includes:
    Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, type 2
N07.7 Hereditary nephropathy, not elsewhere classified, diffuse crescentic glomerulonephritis
     Includes:
    Extracapillary glomerulonephritis
N07.8 Hereditary nephropathy, not elsewhere classified, other
     Includes:
    Proliferative glomerulonephritis NOS
N07.9 
N08.39*o
Hereditary nephropathy, not elsewhere classified, unspecified
N08*
Glomerular disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Excludes:
nephropathy in diseases classified elsewhere
renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in diseases classified elsewhere (N16.-*)
N08.0* Glomerular disorders in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Glomerular disorders in:
    •
     mumps (B26.8†)
      •
       Plasmodium malariae malaria (B52.0†)
        •
         schistosomiasis [bilharziasis] (B65.-†)
          •
           sepsis (A40-A41†)
            •
             strongyloidiasis (B78.-†)
              •
               syphilis (A52.7†)
N08.1* Glomerular disorders in neoplastic diseases
      Includes:
     Glomerular disorders in:
    •
     multiple myeloma (C90.0†)
      •
       Waldenström's macroglobulinaemia (C88.0†)
N08.2* Glomerular disorders in blood diseases and disorders involving the immune mechanism
      Includes:
     Glomerular disorders in:
    •
     cryoglobulinaemia (D89.1†)
      •
       disseminated intravascular coagulation [defibrination syndrome] (D65†)
        •
         haemolytic-uraemic syndrome (D59.3†)
          •
           Henoch(-Schönlein) purpura (D69.0†)
             •
              sickle-cell disorders (D57.-†)
N08.3* Glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus (E10-E14† with common fourth character .2)
N08.31*o Glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, stage 1
        Includes:
       Kidney damage with normal or increased GFR (>90mL/min)
N08.32*o Glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, stage 2
        Includes:
       Kidney damage with mild decreased GFR (60-89 mL/min)
N08.33*o Glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, stage 3
        Includes:
       Kidney damage with moderately decreased GFR (30-59 mL/min)
N08.34*o Glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, stage 4
        Includes:
       Kidney damage with severely decreased GFR (15-29 mL/min)
N08.35*o Glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, stage 5
        Includes:
       End-stage kidney disease (ESKD)
N08.38*o Other glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus
N08.39*o Unspecified glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus
        Includes:
       Chronic kidney disease, stage unspecified
575
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N08.4* Glomerular disorders in other endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases
      Includes:
     Glomerular disorders in:
    •
     amyloidosis (E85.-†)
      •
       Fabry(-Anderson) disease (E75.2†)
        •
         lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency (E78.6†)
N08.5* Glomerular disorders in systemic connective tissue disorders
      Includes:
     Glomerular disorders in:
    •
     Goodpasture's syndrome (M31.0†)
      •
       microscopic polyangiitis (M31.7†)
        •
         systemic lupus erythematosus (M32.1†)
          •
           thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (M31.1†)
            •
             Wegener's granulomatosis (M31.3†)
N08.8* Glomerular disorders in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Glomerular disorders in subacute bacterial endocarditis (I33.0†)
N08.4*
576
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
Renal tubulo-interstitial diseases
(N10-N16)
N12
Includes:
pyelonephritis
Use additional code to identify associated chronic kidney disease (N18.-)
Excludes:
pyeloureteritis cystica (N28.84)
N10
Acute tubulo-interstitial nephritis
Includes:
Acute:
•
infectious interstitial nephritis
•
pyelitis
•
pyelonephritis
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Use additional code from category E10-E14 with fourth and fifth characters .28 to classify any associated
diabetes mellitus.
N11
Chronic tubulo-interstitial nephritis
Includes:
Chronic:
•
infectious interstitial nephritis
•
pyelitis
•
pyelonephritis
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth characters .28 to classify any associated
diabetes mellitus.
N11.0 Nonobstructive reflux-associated chronic pyelonephritis
     Includes:
    Pyelonephritis (chronic) associated with (vesicoureteral) reflux
   Excludes:
  vesicoureteral reflux NOS (N13.7)
N11.1 Chronic obstructive pyelonephritis
     Includes:
    Pyelonephritis (chronic) associated with
•
•
•
•
Excludes:
anomaly
kinking
obstruction
stricture
of
pelviureteric junction
pyeloureteric junction
ureter
calculous pyelonephritis (N20.9)
obstructive uropathy (N13.-)
N11.8 Other chronic tubulo-interstitial nephritis
     Includes:
    Nonobstructive chronic pyelonephritis NOS
N11.9 Chronic tubulo-interstitial nephritis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Chronic:
   •
    interstitial nephritis NOS
   •
    pyelitis NOS
   •
    pyelonephritis NOS
N12
Tubulo-interstitial nephritis, not specified as acute or chronic
Includes:
Interstitial nephritis NOS
Pyelitis NOS
Pyelonephritis NOS
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth characters .28 to classify any associated
diabetes mellitus.
Excludes:
calculous pyelonephritis (N20.9)
577
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N13
Obstructive and reflux uropathy
Excludes:
N13
calculus of kidney and ureter without hydronephrosis (N20.-)
congenital obstructive defects of renal pelvis and ureter (Q62.0 - Q62.3)
obstructive pyelonephritis (N11.1)
N13.0 Hydronephrosis with ureteropelvic junction obstruction
     Excludes:
    with infection (N13.6)
N13.1 Hydronephrosis with ureteral stricture, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    with infection (N13.6)
N13.2 Hydronephrosis with renal and ureteral calculous obstruction
     Excludes:
    with infection (N13.6)
N13.3 Other and unspecified hydronephrosis
     Excludes:
    with infection (N13.6)
N13.4 Hydroureter
     Excludes:
    with infection (N13.6)
N13.5 Kinking and stricture of ureter without hydronephrosis
     Excludes:
    with infection (N13.6)
N13.6 Pyonephrosis
     Includes:
    Conditions in N13.0-N13.5 with infection
   Obstructive uropathy with infection
  Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
N13.7 Vesicoureteral-reflux-associated uropathy
     Includes:
    Vesicoureteral reflux:
   •
    NOS
   •
    with scarring
   Excludes:
  reflux-associated pyelonephritis (N11.0)
N13.8 Other obstructive and reflux uropathy
N13.9 Obstructive and reflux uropathy, unspecified
     Includes:
    Urinary tract obstruction NOS
N14
Drug- and heavy-metal-induced tubulo-interstitial and tubular conditions
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify toxic agent.
N14.0 Analgesic nephropathy
N14.1 Nephropathy induced by other drugs, medicaments and biological substances
N14.2 Nephropathy induced by unspecified drug, medicament or biological substance
N14.3 Nephropathy induced by heavy metals
N14.4 Toxic nephropathy, not elsewhere classified
N15
Other renal tubulo-interstitial diseases
N15.0 Balkan nephropathy
     Includes:
    Balkan endemic nephropathy
N15.1 Renal and perinephric abscess
N15.8 Other specified renal tubulo-interstitial diseases
N15.9 Renal tubulo-interstitial disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Infection of kidney NOS
   Excludes:
  urinary tract infection NOS (N39.0)
578
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
N16*
Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
N16.0* N16.1* Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in neoplastic diseases
             Includes:
            Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in:
           •
            leukaemia (C91-C95†)
             •
              lymphoma (C81-C85†), C96.-†)
                 •
                  multiple myeloma (C90.0†)
N16.2* Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in blood diseases and disorders involving the immune
      mechanism
     Includes:
    Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in:
   •
    mixed cryoglobulinaemia (D89.1†)
     •
      sarcoidosis (D86.-†)
N16.3* Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in metabolic diseases
      Includes:
     Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in:
    •
     cystinosis (E72.0†)
      •
       glycogen storage disease (E74.0†)
        •
         Wilson's disease (E83.0†)
N16.4* Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in systemic connective tissue disorders
      Includes:
     Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in:
    •
     sicca syndrome [Sjögren] (M35.0†)
       •
        systemic lupus erythematosus (M32.1†)
N16.5* Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in transplant rejection (T86.-†)
N16.8* 
N16.8*
Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders (due to)(in):
•
 brucellosis (A23.-†)
  •
   diphtheria (A36.8†)
    •
     salmonella infection (A02.2†)
      •
       sepsis (A40-A41†)
        •
         toxoplasmosis (B58.8†)
Renal tubulo-interstitial disorders in other diseases classified elsewhere
579
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N17
Renal failure
(N17-N19)
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify external agent.
Excludes:
congenital renal failure (P96.0)
drug- and heavy-metal-induced tubulo-interstitial and tubular conditions (N14.-)
extrarenal uraemia (R39.2)
haemolytic-uraemic syndrome (D59.3)
hepatorenal syndrome (K76.7):
•
postpartum (O90.4)
prerenal uraemia (R39.2)
renal failure:
•
complicating abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07)(O08.4)
•
following labour and delivery (O90.4-)
•
postprocedural (N99.0)
N17
Acute renal failure
Includes:
acute renal impairment
N17.0 Acute renal failure with tubular necrosis
     Includes:
    Tubular necrosis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    acute
   •
    renal
N17.1 Acute renal failure with acute cortical necrosis
     Includes:
    Cortical necrosis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    acute
   •
    renal
N17.2 Acute renal failure with medullary necrosis
     Includes:
    Medullary [papillary] necrosis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    acute
   •
    renal
   Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth characters .28 to classify any associated
  diabetes mellitus.
N17.8 Other acute renal failure
N17.9 Acute renal failure, unspecified
     Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth characters .28 to classify any associated
    diabetes mellitus.
N18
Chronic kidney disease
Includes:
chronic uraemia
diffuse sclerosing glomerulonephritis
Use additional code to identify underlying disease.
Use additional codes to identify any associated hypertensive renal disease (I12) or hypertensive heart and renal
disease (I13).
N18.1 Chronic kidney disease, stage 1
     Includes:
    Kidney damage with normal or increased GFR (>90 mL/min)
N18.2 Chronic kidney disease, stage 2
     Includes:
    Kidney damage with mild decreased GFR (60-89 mL/min)
N18.3 Chronic kidney disease, stage 3
     Includes:
    Kidney damage with moderately decreased GFR (30-59 mL/min)
N18.4 Chronic kidney disease, stage 4
     Includes:
    Kidney damage with severely decreased GFR (15-29 mL/min)
580
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
N18.5
N18.9
N19
Chronic kidney disease, stage 5
Includes:
Chronic uraemia
End stage kidney disease:
•
NOS
•
in allograft failure
•
on dialysis
•
without dialysis or transplant
Renal retinitis† (H32.8*)
Uraemic:
•
apoplexia† (I68.8*)
•
dementia† (F02.8*)
•
neuropathy† (G63.8*)
•
paralysis† (G99.8*)
•
pericarditis† (I32.8*)
N19
Chronic kidney disease, unspecified
Includes:
Chronic renal impairment
Unspecified kidney failure
Includes:
Renal insufficiency NOS
Uraemia NOS
Use additional codes to identify any associated hypertensive renal disease (I12) or hypertensive heart and renal
disease (I13)
Excludes:
uraemia of newborn (P96.0)
581
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N20
Urolithiasis
(N20-N23)
N20
Calculus of kidney and ureter
Includes:
Excludes:
Calculous pyelonephritis
with hydronephrosis (N13.2)
N20.0 Calculus of kidney
     Includes:
    Nephrolithiasis NOS
   Renal calculus or stone
  Staghorn calculus
 Stone in kidney
N20.1 Calculus of ureter
     Includes:
    Ureteric stone
N20.2 Calculus of kidney with calculus of ureter
N20.9 Urinary calculus, unspecified
N21
Calculus of lower urinary tract
Includes:
with cystitis and urethritis
N21.0 Calculus in bladder
     Includes:
    Calculus in diverticulum of bladder
   Urinary bladder stone
  Excludes:
 staghorn calculus (N20.0)
N21.1 Calculus in urethra
N21.8 Other lower urinary tract calculus
N21.9 Calculus of lower urinary tract, unspecified
N22*
Calculus of urinary tract in diseases classified elsewhere
N22.0* Urinary calculus in schistosomiasis [bilharziasis] (B65.-†)
N22.8* Calculus of urinary tract in other diseases classified elsewhere
N23
582
Unspecified renal colic
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
Other disorders of kidney and ureter
(N25-N29)
Excludes:
N25
N28.0
with urolithiasis (N20-N23)
Disorders resulting from impaired renal tubular function
Excludes:
metabolic disorders classifiable to E70-E90)
N25.0 Renal osteodystrophy
     Includes:
    Azotaemic osteodystrophy
   Phosphate-losing tubular disorders
  Renal:
 •
  rickets
 •
  short stature
N25.1 Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
N25.8 Other disorders resulting from impaired renal tubular function
     Includes:
    Lightwood-Albright syndrome
   Renal tubular acidosis NOS
  Secondary hyperparathyroidism of renal origin
N25.9 Disorder resulting from impaired renal tubular function, unspecified
N26
Unspecified contracted kidney
Includes:
Excludes:
N27
Atrophy of kidney (terminal)
Renal sclerosis NOS
diffuse sclerosing glomerulonephritis (N18.-)
hypertensive nephrosclerosis (arteriolar) (arteriosclerotic) (I12)
small kidney of unknown cause (N27.-)
Small kidney of unknown cause
N27.0 Small kidney, unilateral
N27.1 Small kidney, bilateral
N27.9 Small kidney, unspecified
N28
Other disorders of kidney and ureter, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
N28.0
hydroureter (N13.4)
renal disease:
•
acute NOS (N00.9)
•
chronic NOS (N03.9)
ureteric kinking and stricture:
•
with hydronephrosis (N13.1)
•
without hydronephrosis (N13.5)
Ischaemia and infarction of kidney
Includes:
Renal artery
•
embolism
•
obstruction
•
occlusion
•
thrombosis
Renal infarct
Excludes:
Goldblatt's kidney (I70.1)
renal artery (extrarenal part):
•
atherosclerosis (I70.1)
•
congenital stenosis (Q27.1)
583
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N28.1 Cyst of kidney, acquired
     Includes:
    Cyst (multiple)(solitary) of kidney, acquired
   Excludes:
  cystic kidney disease (congenital) (Q61.-)
N28.8 Other specified disorders of kidney and ureter
N28.80o Hypertrophy of kidney
N28.81o Megaloureter
N28.82o Nephroptosis
N28.83o Pyelitis cystica
N28.84o Pyeloureteritis cystica
N28.85o Ureteritis cystica
N28.88o Other specified disorders of kidney and ureter
       Includes:
      Ureterocele
N28.9 Disorder of kidney and ureter, unspecified
     Includes:
    Nephropathy NOS
   Renal disease NOS
  Excludes:
 nephropathy NOS and renal disease NOS with morphological lesion specified in .0-.8 in note at
block heading (N00-N08)
N28.1
N29*
Other disorders of kidney and ureter in diseases classified elsewhere
N29.0* Late syphilis of kidney (A52.7†)
N29.1* Other disorders of kidney and ureter in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Disorders of kidney and ureter in:
    •
     schistosomiasis [bilharziasis] (B65.-†)
      •
       tuberculosis (A18.1†)
N29.8* Other disorders of kidney and ureter in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Cystine storage disease (E72.0†)
584
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
Other diseases of urinary system
(N30-N39)
Excludes:
N30
N32.1
urinary infection (complicating):
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07, O08.8)
•
pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O23.-)(O75.3) (O86.2)
•
with urolithiasis (N20-N23)
Cystitis
Use additional code to identify infectious agent (B95-B97) or responsible external agent (Chapter XX).
Excludes:
prostatocystitis (N41.3)
N30.0 Acute cystitis
     Excludes:
    irradiation cystitis (N30.4)
   trigonitis (N30.3)
N30.1 Interstitial cystitis (chronic)
N30.2 Other chronic cystitis
N30.3 Trigonitis
     Includes:
N30.4 Irradiation cystitis
N30.8 Other cystitis
     Includes:
    Abscess of bladder
   Cystitis cystica (glandularis)
N30.9 Cystitis, unspecified
N31
Urethrotrigonitis
Neuromuscular dysfunction of bladder, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
cord bladder NOS (G95.8)
due to spinal cord lesion (G95.8)
neurogenic bladder due to cauda equina syndrome (G83.4)
urinary incontinence:
•
NOS (R32)
•
specified (N39.3-N39.4)
N31.0 Uninhibited neuropathic bladder, not elsewhere classified
N31.1 Reflex neuropathic bladder, not elsewhere classified
N31.2 Flaccid neuropathic bladder, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Neuropathic bladder:
   •
    atonic (motor)(sensory)
   •
    autonomous
   •
    nonreflex
N31.8 Other neuromuscular dysfunction of bladder
N31.9 Neuromuscular dysfunction of bladder, unspecified
     Includes:
    Neurogenic bladder dysfunction NOS
N32
Other disorders of bladder
Excludes:
calculus in bladder (N21.0)
cystocele (N81.1)
hernia or prolapse of bladder, female (N81.1)
N32.0 Bladder-neck obstruction
     Includes:
    Bladder-neck stenosis (acquired)
N32.1 Vesicointestinal fistula
     Includes:
    Vesicorectal fistula
585
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N32.2 
N32.2
Vesical fistula, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
fistula between bladder and female genital tract (N82.0-N82.1)
N32.3 Diverticulum of bladder
     Includes:
    Diverticulitis of bladder
   Excludes:
  calculus in diverticulum of bladder (N21.0)
N32.4 Rupture of bladder, nontraumatic
N32.8 Other specified disorders of bladder
     Includes:
    Bladder:
   •
    calcified
   •
    contracted
N32.9 Bladder disorder, unspecified
N33*
Bladder disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
N33.0* Tuberculous cystitis (A18.1†)
N33.8* Bladder disorders in other diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Bladder disorder in schistosomiasis [bilharziasis] (B65.-†)
N34
Urethritis and urethral syndrome
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Excludes:
Reiter's disease (M02.3)
urethritis in diseases with a predominantly sexual mode of transmission (A50-A64)
urethrotrigonitis (N30.3)
N34.0 Urethral abscess
     Includes:
    Abscess (of):
   •
    Cowper's gland
   •
    Littré's gland
    •
     periurethral
    •
     urethral (gland)
    Excludes:
   urethral caruncle (N36.2)
N34.1 Nonspecific urethritis
     Includes:
    Urethritis:
   •
    nongonococcal
   •
    nonvenereal
N34.2 Other urethritis
     Includes:
    Meatitis, urethral
   Ulcer of urethra (meatus)
  Urethritis:
 •
  NOS
 •
  postmenopausal
N34.3 Urethral syndrome, unspecified
N35
Urethral stricture
Excludes:
postprocedural urethral stricture (N99.1)
N35.0 Post-traumatic urethral stricture
     Includes:
    Stricture of urethra as a sequela of:
   •
    childbirth
   •
    injury
N35.1 Postinfective urethral stricture, not elsewhere classified
N35.8 Other urethral stricture
N35.9 Urethral stricture, unspecified
     Includes:
    Pinhole meatus NOS
586
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
N36
Other disorders of urethra
N36.0 N36.1 Urethral diverticulum
N36.2 Urethral caruncle
N36.3 Prolapsed urethral mucosa
     Includes:
    Prolapse of urethra
   Urethrocele, male
  Excludes:
 urethrocele, female (N81.0)
N36.8 Other specified disorders of urethra
N36.9 
N39.39o
Urethral fistula
Includes:
False urethral passage
Fistula:
•
 urethroperineal
•
 urethrorectal
•
 urinary NOS
Excludes:
fistula:
•
 urethroscrotal (N50.8)
•
 urethrovaginal (N82.1)
Urethral disorder, unspecified
N37*
Urethral disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
N37.0* Urethritis in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Candidal urethritis (B37.4†)
N37.8* Other urethral disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
N39
Other disorders of urinary system
Excludes:
haematuria:
•
NOS (R31)
•
recurrent and persistent (N02.-)
•
with specified morphological lesion (N02.-)
proteinuria NOS (R80)
N39.0 Urinary tract infection, site not specified
     Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
N39.1 Persistent proteinuria, unspecified
     Excludes:
    complicating pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O11-O15)
   with specified morphological lesion (N06.-)
N39.2 Orthostatic proteinuria, unspecified
     Excludes:
    with specified morphological lesion (N06.-)
N39.3 Stress incontinence
     Note:
    Use additional code (N32.8) if desired, to identify overactive bladder or destrusor muscle
   hyperactivity
  Includes:
 Intrinsic (urethral) sphincter deficiency (ISD)
Urethral hypermobility
N39.30o Mixed incontinence
       Includes:
      Stress incontinence with urge incontinence
N39.39o Stress incontinence
       Includes:
      Stress incontinence not otherwise specified
587
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N39.4 Other specified urinary incontinence
     Note:
    Use additional code (N32.8) if desired, to identify overactive bladder or destrusor muscle
   hyperactivity
  Includes:
 Overflow incontinence
Postvoid dribbling incontinence
Reflex incontinence
Urge incontinence
Excludes:
enuresis NOS (R35.0)
mixed incontinence (N39.30)
nocturnal enuresis (R35.0)
nonorganic urinary incontinence (F98.0)
urinary incontinence NOS (R32)
N39.8 Other specified disorders of urinary system
N39.9 Disorder of urinary system, unspecified
N39.4
588
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
Diseases of male genital organs
(N40-N51)
N40
N43.4
Hyperplasia of prostate
Includes:
Adenofibromatous hypertrophy
Enlargement (benign)
Hypertrophy (benign) (BPH)
Excludes:
N41
of prostate
Median bar (prostate)
Prostatic obstruction NOS
benign neoplasms of prostate (D29.1)
Inflammatory diseases of prostate
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
N41.0 Acute prostatitis
N41.1 Chronic prostatitis
N41.2 Abscess of prostate
N41.3 Prostatocystitis
N41.4o Granulomatous prostatitis
N41.8 Other inflammatory diseases of prostate
N41.9 Inflammatory disease of prostate, unspecified
     Includes:
    Prostatitis NOS
N42
Other disorders of prostate
N42.0 Calculus of prostate
     Includes:
    Prostatic stone
N42.1 Congestion and haemorrhage of prostate
N42.2 Atrophy of prostate
N42.3 Dysplasia of prostate
     Includes:
    Low grade dysplasia
   Excludes:
  high grade dysplasia of prostate (D07.5)
N42.8 Other specified disorders of prostate
N42.80o Prostatodynia syndrome
N42.88o Other specified disorders of prostate
N42.9 Disorder of prostate, unspecified
N43
Hydrocele and spermatocele
Includes:
Excludes:
hydrocele of spermatic cord, testis or tunica vaginalis
congenital hydrocele (P83.5)
N43.0 Encysted hydrocele
N43.1 Infected hydrocele
     Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
N43.2 Other hydrocele
N43.3 Hydrocele, unspecified
N43.4 Spermatocele
589
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N44
N44
Torsion of testis
N44.0 Torsion of testis
N44.00o Torsion of appendix epididymis
N44.01o Extravaginal torsion of spermatic cord
N44.02o Torsion of appendix testis
N44.08o Other torsion of testis
       Includes:
      Intravaginal torsion of spermatic cord
N45
Orchitis and epididymitis
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
N45.0 Orchitis, epididymitis and epididymo-orchitis with abscess
N45.00o Epididymitis with abscess
       Includes:
      Abscess of epididymis
N45.01o Orchitis with abscess
       Includes:
      Abscess of testis
N45.02o Epididymo-orchitis with abscess
N45.9 Orchitis, epididymitis and epididymo-orchitis without abscess
N45.90o Epididymitis
N45.91o Orchitis
N45.92o Epididymo-orchitis
N46
Male infertility
N46.0o Azoospermia
N46.1o Oligospermia
N46.8o Other male infertility
N46.9o Unspecified male infertility
N47 Disorders of prepuce
N47.0o Phimosis
N47.1o Paraphimosis
N47.8o Other disorders of prepuce
      Includes:
     Adherent prepuce
    Benign cyst of prepuce
   Redundant prepuce
  Tight (deficient) foreskin
N48
Other disorders of penis
N48.0 Leukoplakia of penis
     Includes:
    Balanitis xerotica obliterans
   Kraurosis of penis
  Excludes:
 carcinoma in situ of penis (D07.4)
N48.1 Balanoposthitis
     Includes:
    Balanitis
   Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent
N48.2 Other inflammatory disorders of penis
     Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
N48.20o Abscess of penis
590
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
N48.21o Cellulitis of penis
N48.28o Other inflammatory disorders of penis
       Includes:
      Boil of penis
     Carbuncle of corpus cavernosum and penis
    Cavernitis (penis)
N48.3 Priapism
     Includes:
N48.4 Male erectile dysfunction
     Includes:
    Impotence of organic origin
   Use additional code to identify cause.
  Excludes:
 psychogenic impotence (F52.2)
N48.40o Male erectile dysfunction due to arterial insufficiency
N48.41o Male erectile dysfunction due to corporovenous occlusive dysfunction
N48.48o Male erectile dysfunction due to other cause
N48.49o Male erectile dysfunction, unspecified
       Includes:
      Impotence of organic origin NOS
N48.5 Ulcer of penis
N48.6 Induratio penis plastica
     Includes:
    Peyronie's disease
   Plastic induration of penis
N48.8 Other specified disorders of penis
     Includes:
    Atrophy
   Hypertrophy
  Thrombosis
Excludes:
N48.9
N49
N49.9
Painful erection
of corpus cavernosum and penis
Painful ejaculation
Benign cyst of prepuce (N47.8)
Disorder of penis, unspecified
Inflammatory disorders of male genital organs, not elsewhere classified
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Excludes:
inflammation of penis (N48.1-N48.2)
orchitis and epididymitis (N45.-)
N49.0 Inflammatory disorders of seminal vesicle
     Includes:
    Vesiculitis NOS
N49.1 Inflammatory disorders of spermatic cord, tunica vaginalis and vas deferens
     Includes:
    Vasitis
N49.2 Inflammatory disorders of scrotum
N49.3o Fournier's gangrene
      Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .68 to classify any associated diabetes
     mellitus
    Excludes:
   Fournier's gangrene in female (N76.88)
N49.8 Inflammatory disorders of other specified male genital organs
     Includes:
    Inflammation of multiple sites in male genital organs
N49.9 Inflammatory disorder of unspecified male genital organ
     Includes:
    Abscess
   Boil
  of unspecified male genital organ
 Carbuncle
Cellulitis
591
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N50
Other disorders of male genital organs
Excludes:
N50
torsion of testis (N44)
N50.0 Atrophy of testis
N50.1 Vascular disorders of male genital organs
     Excludes:
    Vascular deficiency causing male erectile dysfunction (N48.4)
N50.10o Hematospermia
N50.18o Other vascular disorders of male genital organs
       Includes:
      Haematocele NOS
     Spontaneous hemorrhage
    of male genital organs
   Thrombosis
N50.8 Other specified disorders of male genital organs
     Includes:
    Atrophy
   Hypertrophy
  of scrotum, seminal vesicle, spermatic cord, testis [except atrophy],
 Oedema
tunica vaginalis and vas deferens NOS
Ulcer
Benign cyst
Other noninflammatory
of testis
disorders
Chylocele, tunica vaginalis (nonfilarial) NOS
Cyst of (tunica albuginea) testis
Fistula, urethroscrotal
Stricture of:
•
 spermatic cord
•
 tunica vaginalis
•
 vas deferens
N50.9 Disorder of male genital organs, unspecified
N51*
Disorders of male genital organs in diseases classified elsewhere
N51.0* Disorders of prostate in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Prostatitis:
    •
     gonococcal (A54.2†)
      •
       trichomonal (A59.0†)
        •
         tuberculous (A18.1†)
N51.1* Disorders of testis and epididymis in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Chlamydial:
    •
     epididymitis (A56.1†)
      •
       orchitis (A56.1†)
        Gonococcal:
       •
        epididymitis (A54.2†)
         •
          orchitis (A54.2†)
           Mumps orchitis (B26.0†)
            Tuberculosis of:
           •
            epididymis (A18.1†)
             •
              testis (A18.1†)
N51.2* Balanitis in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Balanitis:
    •
     amoebic (A06.8†)
      •
       candidal (B37.4†)
N51.8* Other disorders of male genital organs in diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Filarial chylocele, tunica vaginalis (B74.-†)
      Herpesviral [herpes simplex] infection of male genital tract (A60.0†)
       Tuberculosis of seminal vesicle (A18.1†)
592
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
Disorders of breast
(N60-N64)
Excludes:
N60
N64.4
disorders of breast associated with childbirth (O91-O92)
Benign mammary dysplasia
Includes:
fibrocystic mastopathy
N60.0 Solitary cyst of breast
     Includes:
    Cyst of breast
N60.1 Diffuse cystic mastopathy
     Includes:
    Cystic breast
   Excludes:
  with epithelial proliferation (N60.3)
N60.2 Fibroadenosis of breast
     Excludes:
    fibroadenoma of breast (D24)
N60.3 Fibrosclerosis of breast
     Includes:
    Cystic mastopathy with epithelial proliferation
N60.4 Mammary duct ectasia
N60.8 Other benign mammary dysplasias
N60.9 Benign mammary dysplasia, unspecified
N61 Inflammatory disorders of breast
Includes:
Abscess (acute)(chronic)(nonpuerperal) of:
•
areola
•
breast
Carbuncle of breast
Mastitis (acute)(subacute)(nonpuerperal):
•
NOS
•
infective
Sclerosing lymphocytic lobulitis
Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth characters .68 to classify any associated
diabetes mellitus.
Excludes:
neonatal infective mastitis (P39.0)
N62
Hypertrophy of breast
Includes:
N63
Unspecified lump in breast
Includes:
N64
Gynaecomastia
Hypertrophy of breast:
•
NOS
•
massive pubertal
Nodule(s) NOS in breast
Other disorders of breast
N64.0 Fissure and fistula of nipple
N64.1 Fat necrosis of breast
     Includes:
    Fat necrosis (segmental) of breast
N64.2 Atrophy of breast
N64.3 Galactorrhoea not associated with childbirth
N64.4 Mastodynia
593
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N64.5 Other signs and symptoms in breast
     Includes:
    Induration of breast
   Nipple discharge
  Retraction of nipple
N64.8 Other specified disorders of breast
     Includes:
    Galactocele
   Subinvolution of breast (postlactational)
N64.9 Disorder of breast, unspecified
N64.5
594
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
Inflammatory diseases of female pelvic organs
(N70-N77)
Excludes:
N70
N73.3
those complicating:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07, O08.0)
•
pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O23.-, O75.3, (O85), (O86.-)
Salpingitis and oophoritis
Includes:
abscess (of):
•
fallopian tube
•
ovary
•
tubo-ovarian
pyosalpinx
salpingo-oophoritis
tubo-ovarian inflammatory disease
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
N70.0 Acute salpingitis and oophoritis
N70.1 Chronic salpingitis and oophoritis
     Includes:
    Hydrosalpinx
N70.9 Salpingitis and oophoritis, unspecified
N71
Inflammatory disease of uterus, except cervix
Includes:
endo(myo)metritis
metritis
myometritis
pyometra
uterine abscess
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
N71.0 Acute inflammatory disease of uterus
N71.1 Chronic inflammatory disease of uterus
N71.9 Inflammatory disease of uterus, unspecified
N72
Inflammatory disease of cervix uteri
Includes:
Cervicitis
Endocervicitis
Exocervicitis
with or without erosion or ectropion
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Excludes:
erosion and ectropion of cervix without cervicitis (N86)
N73
Other female pelvic inflammatory diseases
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
N73.0 Acute parametritis and pelvic cellulitis
     Includes:
    Abscess of:
   •
    broad ligament
   •
    parametrium
   specified as acute
  Pelvic cellulitis, female
N73.1 Chronic parametritis and pelvic cellulitis
     Includes:
    Any condition in N73.0 specified as chronic
N73.2 Unspecified parametritis and pelvic cellulitis
     Includes:
    Any condition in N73.0 unspecified whether acute or chronic
N73.3 Female acute pelvic peritonitis
595
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N73.4 
N73.4
Female chronic pelvic peritonitis
N73.5 Female pelvic peritonitis, unspecified
N73.6 Female pelvic peritoneal adhesions
     Excludes:
    postprocedural pelvic peritoneal adhesions (N99.4)
N73.8 Other specified female pelvic inflammatory diseases
N73.9 Female pelvic inflammatory disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Female pelvic infection or inflammation NOS
N74*
Female pelvic inflammatory disorders in diseases classified elsewhere
N74.0* Tuberculous infection of cervix uteri (A18.1†)
N74.1* Female tuberculous pelvic inflammatory disease (A18.1†)
        Includes:
       Tuberculous endometritis
N74.2* Female syphilitic pelvic inflammatory disease (A51.4†, A52.7†)
N74.3* Female gonococcal pelvic inflammatory disease (A54.2†)
N74.4* Female chlamydial pelvic inflammatory disease
      Includes:
     Female chlamydial pelvic inflammatory disease
N74.8* Female pelvic inflammatory disorders in other diseases classified elsewhere
N75
Diseases of Bartholin's gland
N75.0 Cyst of Bartholin's gland
N75.1 Abscess of Bartholin's gland
N75.8 Other diseases of Bartholin's gland
     Includes:
    Bartholinitis
N75.9 Disease of Bartholin's gland, unspecified
N76
Other inflammation of vagina and vulva
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Excludes:
senile (atrophic) vaginitis (N95.2)
N76.0 Acute vaginitis
     Includes:
    Vaginitis NOS
   Vulvovaginitis:
  •
   NOS
  •
   acute
N76.1 Subacute and chronic vaginitis
     Includes:
    Vulvovaginitis:
   •
    chronic
   •
    subacute
N76.2 Acute vulvitis
     Includes:
    Vulvitis NOS
N76.3 Subacute and chronic vulvitis
N76.4 Abscess of vulva
     Includes:
    Furuncle of vulva
N76.5 Ulceration of vagina
N76.6 Ulceration of vulva
596
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
N76.8 Other specified inflammation of vagina and vulva
N76.80o Mucositis (ulcerative) of vagina and vulva
       Includes:
      Mucositis (ulcerative):
     •
      drug-induced
     •
      radiation induced
     Use additional code to identify any agranulocytosis (neutropenia) (D70.0)
    Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify external agent.
N76.88o Other specified inflammation of vagina and vulva
       Includes: Fournier's gangrene in female
      Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth characters .68 to classify any associated
     diabetes mellitus.
N77* Vulvovaginal ulceration and inflammation in diseases classified elsewhere
N77.0* Ulceration of vulva in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Ulceration of vulva in:
    •
     herpesviral [herpes simplex] infection (A60.0†)
      •
       tuberculosis (A18.1†)
N77.1* Vaginitis, vulvitis and vulvovaginitis in infectious and parasitic diseases classified elsewhere
      Includes:
     Vaginitis, vulvitis and vulvovaginitis in:
    •
     candidiasis (B37.3†)
      •
       herpesviral [herpes simplex] infection (A60.0†)
        •
         pinworm infection (B80†)
N77.8* 
N77.8*
Vulvovaginal ulceration and inflammation in other diseases classified elsewhere
Includes:
Ulceration of vulva in Behçet's disease (M35.2†)
597
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N80
Noninflammatory disorders of female genital tract
(N80-N98)
N80
Endometriosis
N80.0 Endometriosis of uterus
     Includes:
    Adenomyosis
N80.1 Endometriosis of ovary
N80.2 Endometriosis of fallopian tube
N80.3 Endometriosis of pelvic peritoneum
N80.4 Endometriosis of rectovaginal septum and vagina
N80.5 Endometriosis of intestine
N80.6 Endometriosis in cutaneous scar
N80.8 Other endometriosis
N80.9 Endometriosis, unspecified
N81
Female genital prolapse
Excludes:
genital prolapse complicating pregnancy, labour or delivery (O34.5-)
prolapse:
•
and hernia of ovary and fallopian tube (N83.4)
•
of vaginal vault after hysterectomy (N99.3)
N81.0 Female urethrocele
     Excludes:
    urethrocele with:
   •
    cystocele (N81.1)
   •
    prolapse of uterus (N81.2-N81.4)
N81.1 Cystocele
     Includes:
Excludes:
Cystocele with urethrocele
Prolapse of (anterior) vaginal (wall) NOS
cystocele with prolapse of uterus (N81.2-N81.4)
N81.2 Incomplete uterovaginal prolapse
     Includes:
    Prolapse of cervix NOS
   Uterine prolapse:
  •
   first degree
  •
   second degree
N81.3 Complete uterovaginal prolapse
     Includes:
    Procidentia (uteri) NOS
   Third degree uterine prolapse
N81.4 Uterovaginal prolapse, unspecified
     Includes:
    Prolapse of uterus NOS
N81.5 Vaginal enterocele
     Excludes:
    enterocele with prolapse of uterus (N81.2-N81.4)
N81.6 Rectocele
     Includes:
    Excludes:
Prolapse of posterior vaginal wall
rectal prolapse (K62.3)
rectocele with prolapse of uterus (N81.2-N81.4)
N81.8 Other female genital prolapse
     Includes:
    Deficient perineum
   Old laceration of muscles of pelvic floor
N81.9 Female genital prolapse, unspecified
598
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
N82
Fistulae involving female genital tract
Excludes:
vesicointestinal fistulae (N32.1)
N82.0 N82.1 Other female urinary-genital tract fistulae
           Includes:
          Fistula:
         •
          cervicovesical
         •
          ureterovaginal
         •
          urethrovaginal
         •
          uteroureteric
         •
          uterovesical
N82.2 Fistula of vagina to small intestine
N82.3 Fistula of vagina to large intestine
     Includes:
    Rectovaginal fistula
N82.4 Other female intestinal-genital tract fistulae
     Includes:
    Intestinouterine fistula
N82.5 Female genital tract-skin fistulae
     Includes:
    Fistula:
   •
    uterus to abdominal wall
   •
    vaginoperineal
N82.8 Other female genital tract fistulae
N82.9 
N83.7
Vesicovaginal fistula
Female genital tract fistula, unspecified
N83
Noninflammatory disorders of ovary, fallopian tube and broad ligament
Excludes:
hydrosalpinx (N70.1)
N83.0 Follicular cyst of ovary
     Includes:
    Cyst of graafian follicle
   Haemorrhagic follicular cyst (of ovary)
N83.1 Corpus luteum cyst
     Includes:
    Haemorrhagic corpus luteum cyst
N83.2 Other and unspecified ovarian cysts
     Includes:
    Retention
   Simple
Excludes:
cyst of ovary
ovarian cyst:
•
developmental (Q50.1)
•
neoplastic (D27)
polycystic ovarian syndrome (E28.2)
N83.3 Acquired atrophy of ovary and fallopian tube
N83.4 Prolapse and hernia of ovary and fallopian tube
N83.5 Torsion of ovary, ovarian pedicle and fallopian tube
N83.50o Torsion of ovary and ovarian pedicle
N83.51o Torsion of fallopian tube
N83.52o Torsion of ovary and ovarian pedicle with torsion of fallopian tube
N83.6 Haematosalpinx
     Excludes:
    haematosalpinx with:
   •
    haematocolpos (N89.7)
   •
    haematometra (N85.7)
N83.7 Haematoma of broad ligament
599
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N83.8 Other noninflammatory disorders of ovary, fallopian tube and broad ligament
     Includes:
    Broad ligament laceration syndrome [Allen-Masters]
   Endosalpingiosis
N83.9 Noninflammatory disorder of ovary, fallopian tube and broad ligament, unspecified
N83.8
N84
Polyp of female genital tract
Excludes:
adenomatous polyp (D28.-)
placental polyp (O90.8-)
N84.0 Polyp of corpus uteri
     Includes:
    Polyp of:
   •
    endometrium
   •
    uterus NOS
   Excludes:
  polypoid endometrial hyperplasia (N85.0)
N84.1 Polyp of cervix uteri
     Includes:
    Mucous polyp of cervix
N84.2 Polyp of vagina
N84.3 Polyp of vulva
     Includes:
    Polyp of labia
N84.8 Polyp of other parts of female genital tract
N84.9 Polyp of female genital tract, unspecified
N85
Other noninflammatory disorders of uterus, except cervix
Excludes:
endometriosis (N80.-)
inflammatory diseases of uterus (N71.-)
noninflammatory disorders of cervix except malposition (N86-N88)
polyp of corpus uteri (N84.0)
uterine prolapse (N81.-)
N85.0 Endometrial glandular hyperplasia
     Includes:
    Hyperplasia of endometrium:
   •
    NOS
   •
    cystic
   •
    glandular-cystic
   •
    polypoid
N85.1 Endometrial adenomatous hyperplasia
     Includes:
    Hyperplasia of endometrium, atypical (adenomatous)
N85.2 Hypertrophy of uterus
     Includes:
    Bulky or enlarged uterus
   Excludes:
  puerperal hypertrophy of uterus (O90.8)
N85.3 Subinvolution of uterus
     Excludes:
    puerperal subinvolution of uterus (O90.8)
N85.4 Malposition of uterus
     Includes:
    Anteversion
   Retroflexion
  Retroversion
Excludes:
of uterus
that complicating pregnancy, labour or delivery (O345.-, O65.5)
N85.5 Inversion of uterus
     Excludes:
    current obstetric trauma (O71.2-)
   postpartum inversion of uterus (O71.2-)
N85.6 Intrauterine synechiae
600
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
N85.7
Haematometra
Includes:
Haematosalpinx with haematometra
Excludes:
haematometra with haematocolpos (N89.7)
N85.8 Other specified noninflammatory disorders of uterus
     Includes:
    Atrophy of uterus, acquired
   Fibrosis of uterus NOS
N85.9 
N88.9
Noninflammatory disorder of uterus, unspecified
Includes:
Disorder of uterus NOS
N86
Erosion and ectropion of cervix uteri
Includes:
Decubitus (trophic) ulcer
Eversion
Excludes:
N87
of cervix
with cervicitis (N72)
Dysplasia of cervix uteri
Excludes:
carcinoma in situ of cervix (D06.-)
N87.0 Mild cervical dysplasia
     Includes:
    Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia [CIN], grade I
N87.1 Moderate cervical dysplasia
     Includes:
    Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia [CIN], grade II
N87.2 Severe cervical dysplasia, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Severe cervical dysplasia NOS
   Excludes:
  cervical intraepithelial neoplasia [CIN], grade III, with or without mention of severe dysplasia
 (D06.-)
N87.9 Dysplasia of cervix uteri, unspecified
N88
Other noninflammatory disorders of cervix uteri
Excludes:
inflammatory disease of cervix (N72)
polyp of cervix (N84.1)
N88.0 Leukoplakia of cervix uteri
N88.1 Old laceration of cervix uteri
     Includes:
    Adhesions of cervix
   Excludes:
  current obstetric trauma (O71.3-)
N88.2 Stricture and stenosis of cervix uteri
     Excludes:
    complicating labour (O65.5-)
N88.3 Incompetence of cervix uteri
     Includes:
    Investigation and management of (suspected) cervical incompetence in a nonpregnant woman
   Excludes:
  affecting fetus or newborn (P01.0)
 complicating pregnancy (O34.3-)
N88.4 Hypertrophic elongation of cervix uteri
N88.8 Other specified noninflammatory disorders of cervix uteri
     Excludes:
    current obstetric trauma (O71.3)
N88.9 Noninflammatory disorder of cervix uteri, unspecified
601
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N89
Other noninflammatory disorders of vagina
Excludes:
N89
carcinoma in situ of vagina (D07.2)
inflammation of vagina (N76.-)
senile (atrophic) vaginitis (N95.2)
trichomonal leukorrhoea (A59.0)
N89.0 Mild vaginal dysplasia
     Includes:
    Vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia [VAIN], grade I
N89.1 Moderate vaginal dysplasia
     Includes:
    Vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia [VAIN], grade II
N89.2 Severe vaginal dysplasia, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Severe vaginal dysplasia NOS
   Excludes:
  vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia [VAIN], grade III, with or without mention of severe dysplasia
 (D07.2)
N89.3 Dysplasia of vagina, unspecified
N89.4 Leukoplakia of vagina
N89.5 Stricture and atresia of vagina
     Includes:
    Vaginal:
   •
    adhesions
   •
    stenosis
   Excludes:
  postoperative adhesions of vagina (N99.2)
N89.6 Tight hymenal ring
     Includes:
    Rigid hymen
   Tight introitus
  Excludes:
 imperforate hymen (Q52.3)
N89.7 Haematocolpos
     Includes:
    Haematocolpos with haematometra or haematosalpinx
N89.8 Other specified noninflammatory disorders of vagina
     Includes:
    Leukorrhoea NOS
   Old vaginal laceration
  Pessary ulcer of vagina
 Excludes:
current obstetric trauma (O70.-, O71.4, O71.7-O71.8)
old laceration involving muscles of pelvic floor (N81.8)
N89.9 Noninflammatory disorder of vagina, unspecified
N90
Other noninflammatory disorders of vulva and perineum
Excludes:
carcinoma in situ of vulva (D07.1)
current obstetric trauma (O70.-, O71.7-O71.8)
inflammation of vulva (N76.-)
N90.0 Mild vulvar dysplasia
     Includes:
    Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia [VIN], grade I
N90.1 Moderate vulvar dysplasia
     Includes:
    Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia [VIN], grade II
N90.2 Severe vulvar dysplasia, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Severe vulvar dysplasia NOS
   Excludes:
  vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia grade III, [VIN] with or without mention of severe dysplasia
 (D07.1)
N90.3 Dysplasia of vulva, unspecified
N90.4 Leukoplakia of vulva
     Includes:
    Dystrophy
   Kraurosis
602
of vulva
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
N90.5 Atrophy of vulva
     Includes:
    Stenosis of vulva
N90.6 Hypertrophy of vulva
     Includes:
    Hypertrophy of labia
N90.7 Vulvar cyst
N90.8 Other specified noninflammatory disorders of vulva and perineum
     Includes:
    Adhesions of vulva
   Hypertrophy of clitoris
N90.9 Noninflammatory disorder of vulva and perineum, unspecified
N91
N92.5
Absent, scanty and rare menstruation
Excludes:
ovarian dysfunction (E28.-)
N91.0 Primary amenorrhoea
     Includes:
    Failure to start menstruation at puberty.
N91.1 Secondary amenorrhoea
     Includes:
    Absence of menstruation in a woman who had previously menstruated.
N91.2 Amenorrhoea, unspecified
     Includes:
    Absence of menstruation NOS
N91.3 Primary oligomenorrhoea
     Includes:
    Menstruation which is scanty or rare from the start.
N91.4 Secondary oligomenorrhoea
     Includes:
    Scanty and rare menstruation in a woman with previously normal periods.
N91.5 Oligomenorrhoea, unspecified
     Includes:
    Hypomenorrhoea NOS
N92
Excessive, frequent and irregular menstruation
Excludes:
postmenopausal bleeding (N95.0)
N92.0 Excessive and frequent menstruation with regular cycle
     Includes:
    Heavy periods NOS
   Menorrhagia NOS
  Polymenorrhoea
N92.1 Excessive and frequent menstruation with irregular cycle
     Includes:
    Irregular intermenstrual bleeding
   Irregular, shortened intervals between menstrual bleeding
  Menometrorrhagia
 Metrorrhagia
N92.2 Excessive menstruation at puberty
     Includes:
    Excessive bleeding associated with onset of menstrual periods
   Pubertal menorrhagia
  Puberty bleeding
N92.3 Ovulation bleeding
     Includes:
    Regular intermenstrual bleeding
N92.4 Excessive bleeding in the premenopausal period
     Includes:
    Menorrhagia or metrorrhagia:
   •
    climacteric
   •
    menopausal
   •
    preclimacteric
   •
    premenopausal
N92.5 Other specified irregular menstruation
603
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N92.6
N92.6
N93
Irregular menstruation, unspecified
Includes:
Irregular:
•
bleeding NOS
•
periods NOS
Excludes:
irregular menstruation with:
•
lengthened intervals or scanty bleeding (N91.3-N91.5)
•
shortened intervals or excessive bleeding (N92.1)
Other abnormal uterine and vaginal bleeding
Excludes:
neonatal vaginal haemorrhage (P54.6)
pseudomenses (P54.6)
N93.0 Postcoital and contact bleeding
N93.8 Other specified abnormal uterine and vaginal bleeding
     Includes:
    Dysfunctional or functional uterine or vaginal bleeding NOS
N93.9 Abnormal uterine and vaginal bleeding, unspecified
N94
Pain and other conditions associated with female genital organs and
menstrual cycle
N94.0 Mittelschmerz
N94.1 Dyspareunia
     Excludes:
    psychogenic dyspareunia (F52.6)
N94.2 Vaginismus
     Excludes:
    psychogenic vaginismus (F52.5)
N94.3 Premenstrual tension syndrome
N94.4 Primary dysmenorrhoea
N94.5 Secondary dysmenorrhoea
N94.6 Dysmenorrhoea, unspecified
N94.8 Other specified conditions associated with female genital organs and menstrual cycle
N94.9 Unspecified condition associated with female genital organs and menstrual cycle
N95
Menopausal and other perimenopausal disorders
Excludes:
excessive bleeding in the premenopausal period (N92.4)
postmenopausal:
•
osteoporosis (M81.0):
•
with pathological fracture (M80.0)
•
urethritis (N34.2)
premature menopause NOS (E28.3)
N95.0 Postmenopausal bleeding
     Excludes:
    that associated with artificial menopause (N95.3)
N95.1 Menopausal and female climacteric states
     Includes:
    Symptoms such as flushing, sleeplessness, headache, lack of concentration, associated with
   menopause
  Excludes:
 those associated with artificial menopause (N95.3)
N95.2 Postmenopausal atrophic vaginitis
     Includes:
    Senile (atrophic) vaginitis
   Excludes:
  that associated with artificial menopause (N95.3)
N95.3 States associated with artificial menopause
     Includes:
    Post-artificial-menopause syndrome
N95.8 Other specified menopausal and perimenopausal disorders
N95.9 Menopausal and perimenopausal disorder, unspecified
604
DISEASES OF THE GENITOURINARY SYSTEM (N00-N99)
N96
Habitual aborter
Includes:
Excludes:
N97
Investigation or care in a nonpregnant woman
Relative infertility
currently pregnant (O26.2-)
with current abortion (O03-O06)
N98.9
Female infertility
Includes:
Excludes:
inability to achieve a pregnancy
sterility, female NOS
relative infertility (N96)
N97.0 Female infertility associated with anovulation
N97.1 Female infertility of tubal origin
     Includes:
    Associated with congenital anomaly of tube
   Tubal:
  •
   block
  •
   occlusion
  •
   stenosis
N97.2 Female infertility of uterine origin
     Includes:
    Associated with congenital anomaly of uterus
   Nonimplantation of ovum
N97.3 Female infertility of cervical origin
N97.4 Female infertility associated with male factors
N97.8 Female infertility of other origin
N97.9 Female infertility, unspecified
N98
Complications associated with artificial fertilization
N98.0 Infection associated with artificial insemination
N98.1 Hyperstimulation of ovaries
     Includes:
    Hyperstimulation of ovaries:
   •
    NOS
   •
    associated with induced ovulation
   Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug.
N98.2 Complications of attempted introduction of fertilized ovum following in vitro fertilization
N98.3 Complications of attempted introduction of embryo in embryo transfer
N98.8 Other complications associated with artificial fertilization
     Includes:
    Complications of artificial insemination by:
   •
    donor
   •
    husband
N98.9 Complication associated with artificial fertilization, unspecified
605
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
N99
Other disorders of the genitourinary system
(N99)
N99
Postprocedural disorders of genitourinary system, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
irradiation cystitis (N30.4)
postoophorectomy osteoporosis (M81.1):
•
with pathological fracture (M80.1)
states associated with artificial menopause (N95.3)
N99.0 Postprocedural renal failure
     Use additional code from category (E10-E14) with fourth and fifth digits .28 to classify any associated diabetes
    mellitus.
N99.1 Postprocedural urethral stricture
     Includes:
    Postcatheterization urethral stricture
N99.2 Postoperative adhesions of vagina
N99.3 Prolapse of vaginal vault after hysterectomy
     Use additional code to identify any associated enterocele, cystocele, vaginocele or rectocele (N81.-)
N99.4 Postprocedural pelvic peritoneal adhesions
N99.5 Malfunction of external stoma of urinary tract
N99.50o Haemorrhage from external stoma of urinary tract
       Excludes:
      haemorrhage complicating the procedure (T81.0)
N99.51o Infection of external stoma of urinary tract
       Includes:
      Sepsis of external stoma of urinary tract
     Excludes:
    site of current (healing) surgical wound (T81.4)
N99.52o Other malfunction of external stoma of urinary tract, NEC
       Includes:
      Malfunction of external stoma of urinary tract, NOS
N99.8 Other postprocedural disorders of genitourinary system
     Includes:
    Residual ovary syndrome
N99.9 Postprocedural disorder of genitourinary system, unspecified
606
I
CHAPTER XV
Pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium
(O00-O99)
Note:
Excludes:
The codes included in this chapter are to be used for conditions related to or aggravated by the pregnancy,
childbirth or by the puerperium (maternal causes or obstetric causes)
Certain diseases or injuries complicating pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium classified elsewhere
external causes (for mortality) (V,W,X,Y)
injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T88.1, T88.6-T98)
mental and behavioural disorders associated with the puerperium (F53.-)
obstetrical tetanus (A34)
postpartum necrosis of pituitary gland (E23.0)
puerperal osteomalacia (M83.0)
supervision of:
•
high-risk pregnancy (Z35.-)
•
normal pregnancy (Z34.-)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
O00-O08
O10-O16
O20-O29
O30-O48
O60-O75
O85-O92
O94-O99
Pregnancy with abortive outcome
Oedema, proteinuria and hypertensive disorders in pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium
Other maternal disorders predominantly related to pregnancy
Maternal care related to the fetus and amniotic cavity and possible delivery problems
Complications of labour and delivery
Complications predominantly related to the puerperium
Other obstetric conditions, not elsewhere classified
607
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O00
Pregnancy with abortive outcome
(O00-O08)
Excludes:
O00
continuing pregnancy in multiple gestation after abortion of one fetus or more (O31.11-)
Ectopic pregnancy
Includes:
ruptured ectopic pregnancy
Use additional code from category O08.- to identify any associated complication.
O00.0 Abdominal pregnancy
     Excludes:
    maternal care for viable fetus in abdominal pregnancy (O36.7-)
O00.1 Tubal pregnancy
     Includes:
    Fallopian pregnancy
   Rupture of (fallopian) tube due to pregnancy
  Tubal abortion
O00.2 Ovarian pregnancy
O00.8 Other ectopic pregnancy
     Includes:
    Pregnancy:
   •
    cervical
   •
    cornual
   •
    intraligamentous
   •
    mural
O00.9 Ectopic pregnancy, unspecified
O01
Hydatidiform mole
Use additional code from category O08.- to identify any associated complication.
Excludes:
malignant hydatidiform mole (D39.2)
O01.0 Classical hydatidiform mole
     Includes:
    Complete hydatidiform mole
O01.1 Incomplete and partial hydatidiform mole
O01.9 Hydatidiform mole, unspecified
     Includes:
    Trophoblastic disease NOS
   Vesicular mole NOS
O02
Other abnormal products of conception
Use additional code from category O08.- to identify any associated complication.
Excludes:
papyraceous fetus (O31.0-)
O02.0 Blighted ovum and nonhydatidiform mole
     Includes:
    Mole:
   •
    carneous
   •
    fleshy
   •
    intrauterine NOS
   Pathological ovum
O02.1 Missed abortion
     Includes:
    Early fetal death with retention of dead fetus
   Excludes:
  missed abortion with:
 •
  blighted ovum (O02.0)
 •
  mole:
 •
  hydatidiform (O01.-)
 •
  nonhydatidiform (O02.0)
608
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O02.8
O02.9
O03
Other specified abnormal products of conception
Excludes:
those with:
•
blighted ovum (O02.0)
•
mole:
•
hydatidiform (O01.-)
•
nonhydatidiform (O02.0)
O04.5
Abnormal product of conception, unspecified
Note:
Incomplete abortion includes retained products of conception following abortion.
Spontaneous abortion
Note:
Includes:
Incomplete abortion includes retained products of conception following abortion.
miscarriage
O03.0 Spontaneous abortion, incomplete, complicated by genital tract and pelvic infection
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.0
O03.1 Spontaneous abortion, incomplete, complicated by delayed or excessive haemorrhage
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.1
O03.2 Spontaneous abortion, incomplete, complicated by embolism
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.2
O03.3 Spontaneous abortion, incomplete, with other and unspecified complications
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.3-O08.9
O03.4 Spontaneous abortion, incomplete, without complication
O03.5 Spontaneous abortion, complete or unspecified, complicated by genital tract and pelvic
     infection
    Includes:
   With conditions in O08.0
O03.6 Spontaneous abortion, complete or unspecified, complicated by delayed or excessive
     haemorrhage
    Includes:
   With conditions in O08.1
O03.7 Spontaneous abortion, complete or unspecified, complicated by embolism
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.2
O03.8 Spontaneous abortion, complete or unspecified, with other and unspecified complications
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.3-O08.9
O03.9 Spontaneous abortion, complete or unspecified, without complication
O04
Medical abortion
Note:
Includes:
Incomplete abortion includes retained products of conception following abortion.
termination of pregnancy:
•
legal
•
therapeutic
therapeutic abortion
O04.0 Medical abortion, incomplete, complicated by genital tract and pelvic infection
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.0
O04.1 Medical abortion, incomplete, complicated by delayed or excessive haemorrhage
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.1
O04.2 Medical abortion, incomplete, complicated by embolism
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.2
O04.3 Medical abortion, incomplete, with other and unspecified complications
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.3-O08.9
O04.4 Medical abortion, incomplete, without complication
O04.5 Medical abortion, complete or unspecified, complicated by genital tract and pelvic infection
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.0
609
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O04.6 
O04.6
Medical abortion, complete or unspecified, complicated by delayed or excessive haemorrhage
Includes:
With conditions in O08.1
O04.7 Medical abortion, complete or unspecified, complicated by embolism
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.2
O04.8 Medical abortion, complete or unspecified, with other and unspecified complications
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.3-O08.9
O04.9 Medical abortion, complete or unspecified, without complication
O05
Other abortion
Note:
Includes:
Incomplete abortion includes retained products of conception following abortion.
abortion following:
•
amniocentesis
•
trauma
self-inflicted abortion
O05.0 Other abortion, incomplete, complicated by genital tract and pelvic infection
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.0
O05.1 Other abortion, incomplete, complicated by delayed or excessive haemorrhage
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.1
O05.2 Other abortion, incomplete, complicated by embolism
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.2
O05.3 Other abortion, incomplete, with other and unspecified complications
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.3-O08.9
O05.4 Other abortion, incomplete, without complication
O05.5 Other abortion, complete or unspecified, complicated by genital tract and pelvic infection
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.0
O05.6 Other abortion, complete or unspecified, complicated by delayed or excessive haemorrhage
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.1
O05.7 Other abortion, complete or unspecified, complicated by embolism
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.2
O05.8 Other abortion, complete or unspecified, with other and unspecified complications
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.3-O08.9
O05.9 Other abortion, complete or unspecified, without complication
O07
Failed attempted abortion
Includes:
Excludes:
failure of attempted induction of abortion
incomplete abortion (O03-O05)
O07.3 Failed attempted abortion, complicated
     Includes:
    With conditions in O08.0-O08.9
O07.4 Failed attempted abortion, without complication
     Includes:
    Failed medical abortion NOS
O08
Complications following abortion and ectopic and molar pregnancy
Note:
610
This code is provided primarily for morbidity coding. For use of this category reference should
be made to the morbidity coding rules and guidelines.
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O08.0
Genital tract and pelvic infection following abortion and ectopic and molar pregnancy
Includes:
Endometritis
Oophoritis
Parametritis
Pelvic peritonitis
Salpingitis
Salpingo-oophoritis
Sepsis
O08.6
following conditions classifiable to O00-O07
Use additional code (R57.2) to identify septic shock
Excludes:
septic or septicopyaemic embolism (O08.2)
urinary tract infection (O08.8)
O08.1 Delayed or excessive haemorrhage following abortion and ectopic and molar pregnancy
     Includes:
    Afibrinogenaemia
   Defibrination syndrome
  following conditions classifiable to O00-O07
 Intravascular coagulation
O08.2 Embolism following abortion and ectopic and molar pregnancy
     Includes:
    Embolism:
   •
    NOS
   •
    air
   •
    amniotic fluid
   •
    blood-clot
   following conditions classifiable to O00-O07
  •
   pulmonary
  •
   pyaemic
  •
   septic or
  septicopyaemic
 •
  soap
O08.3 Shock following abortion and ectopic and molar pregnancy
     Includes:
    Circulatory collapse
   following conditions classifiable to O00-O07
  Shock (postoperative)
Excludes:
septic shock (R57.2)
O08.4 Renal failure following abortion and ectopic and molar pregnancy
     Includes:
    Renal:
   •
    failure (acute)
   •
    shutdown
   following conditions classifiable to O00-O07
  •
   tubular necrosis
  Oliguria
 Uraemia
O08.5 Metabolic disorders following abortion and ectopic and molar pregnancy
     Includes:
    Electrolyte imbalance following conditions classifiable to O00-O07
O08.6 Damage to pelvic organs and tissues following abortion and ectopic and molar pregnancy
     Includes:
    Laceration, perforation, tear or chemical damage of:
•
•
•
•
•
•
bladder
bowel
broad ligament
cervix
periurethral tissue
uterus
following conditions classifiable to O00-O07
611
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O08.7 
O08.7
Other venous complications following abortion and ectopic and molar pregnancy
O08.8 Other complications following abortion and ectopic and molar pregnancy
     Includes:
    Cardiac arrest
   following conditions classifiable to O00-O07
  Urinary tract infection
O08.9 Complication following abortion and ectopic and molar pregnancy, unspecified
     Includes:
    Unspecified complication following conditions classifiable to O00-O07
Oedema, proteinuria and hypertensive disorders in pregnancy,
childbirth and the puerperium
(O10-O16)
Note:
In order to satisfy the needs of the Canadian grouping methodology, appropriate codes in the range O10.0 to
O99.8 will have a supplementary subclassification placed at the end of the code to identify the following
1
Delivered, with or without mention of antepartum condition
Antepartum condition with delivery
Delivery NOS
Intrapartum obstetric condition
Pregnancy delivered
2
Delivered with mention of postpartum
Delivery
Pregnancy, delivered
3
4
9
O10
with or without mention of antepartum or intrapartum
complication during the current episode of care
with mention of postpartum or puerperal complication during the current
episode of care
Antepartum condition or complication
Antepartum obstetric condition, not delivered during the current episode of care
Postpartum condition or complication
Postpartum or puerperal obstetric condition or complication following delivery that occurred
•
During previous episode of care
•
Outside hospital with subsequent admission for observation or care
Unspecified as to episode of care
Pre-existing hypertension complicating pregnancy, childbirth and the
puerperium
Includes:
Excludes:
the listed conditions with pre-existing proteinuria
that with increased or superimposed proteinuria (O11)
O10 Pre-existing Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
hypertension or without mention of condition or condition or to episode of
complicating mention of postpartum complication complication care, or not
pregnancy, childbirth antepartum condition applicable
and the puerperium condition 
O10.0 Pre-existing O10.001o O10.002o O10.003o O10.004o O10.009o
essential hypertension 
complicating pregnancy, 
childbirth and the 
puerperium 
Includes
• Any condition in I10 specified as a
reason for obstetric care during
pregnancy, childbirth or the
puerperium
612
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O10 Pre-existing Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
hypertension or without mention of condition or condition or to episode of
complicating mention of postpartum complication complication care, or not
pregnancy, childbirth antepartum condition applicable
and the puerperium condition 
O10.1 O10.101o O10.102o O10.103o O10.104o O10.109o
Pre-existing 
hypertensive heart disease 
complicating pregnancy, 
childbirth and the 
puerperium 
O10.201o O10.202o O10.203o O10.204o O10.209o
O10.3 O10.302o O10.303o O10.304o O10.309o
Pre-existing 
O10.301o 
hypertensive heart and renal 
disease complicating 
pregnancy, childbirth and 
the puerperium 
O10.401o O10.402o O10.403o O10.404o O10.409o
O10.9 O10.902o O10.903o O10.904o O10.909o
Unspecified pre- O10.901o 
existing hypertension 
complicating pregnancy, 
childbirth and the 
puerperium 
Includes
• Any condition in I11 specified as a
reason for obstetric care during
pregnancy, childbirth or the
puerperium
O10.2
Pre-existing
hypertensive renal disease
complicating pregnancy,
childbirth and the
puerperium
Includes
• Any condition in I12 specified as a
reason for obstetric care during
pregnancy, childbirth or the
puerperium
Includes
• Any condition in I13 specified as a
reason for obstetric care during
pregnancy, childbirth or the
puerperium
O10.4
Pre-existing
secondary hypertension
complicating pregnancy,
childbirth and the
puerperium
Includes
• Any condition in I15.- specified as
a reason for obstetric care during
pregnancy, childbirth or the
puerperium
O11
Pre-existing hypertensive disorder with superimposed proteinuria
Includes:
Conditions in O10.- complicated by increased proteinuria
Superimposed pre-eclampsia
O11.001o Pre-existing hypertensive disorder with superimposed proteinuria, delivered, with or without
        mention of antepartum condition
O11.002o Pre-existing hypertensive disorder with superimposed proteinuria, delivered, with mention of
        postpartum complication
O11.003o Pre-existing hypertensive disorder with superimposed proteinuria, antepartum condition or
        complication
613
O11.003o
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O11.004o 
O11.004
Pre-existing hypertensive disorder with superimposed proteinuria, postpartum condition or
complication
O11.009o Pre-existing hypertensive disorder with superimposed proteinuria, unspecified as to episode
        of care, or not applicable
O12
Gestational [pregnancy-induced] oedema and proteinuria without
hypertension
O12 Gestational Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
[pregnancy- or without mention of condition or condition or to episode of
induced] oedema mention of postpartum complication complication care, or not
and proteinuria antepartum complication applicable
without condition 
hypertension 
O12.0 Gestational O12.001o O12.002o O12.003o O12.004o O12.009o
oedema 
O12.1 Gestational O12.101o O12.102o O12.103o O12.104o O12.109o
proteinuria 
O12.2 Gestational O12.201o O12.202o O12.203o O12.204o O12.209o
oedema with 
proteinuria 
O13
Gestational [pregnancy-induced] hypertension without significant
proteinuria
Includes:
Gestational hypertension NOS
Mild pre-eclampsia
Transient hypertension of pregnancy
O13.001o Gestational [pregnancy-induced] hypertension without significant proteinuria, delivered, with
        or without mention of antepartum condition
O13.002o Gestational [pregnancy-induced] hypertension without significant proteinuria, delivered, with
        mention of postpartum complication
O13.003o Gestational [pregnancy-induced] hypertension without significant proteinuria, antepartum
        condition or complication
O13.004o Gestational [pregnancy-induced] hypertension without significant proteinuria, postpartum
        condition or complication
O13.009o Gestational [pregnancy-induced] hypertension without significant proteinuria, unspecified as
        to episode of care, or not applicable
O14
Gestational [pregnancy-induced] hypertension with significant proteinuria
Includes:
Excludes:
HELLP (syndrome) (hemolysis/elevated liver enzymes/low platelets)
superimposed pre-eclampsia (O11)
O14.001o Gestational [pregnancy-induced] hypertension with significant proteinuria, delivered, with or
        without mention of antepartum condition
O14.002o Gestational [pregnancy-induced] hypertension with significant proteinuria, delivered, with
        mention of postpartum complication
O14.003o Gestational [pregnancy-induced] hypertension with significant proteinuria, antepartum
        condition or complication
O14.004o Gestational [pregnancy-induced] hypertension with significant proteinuria, postpartum
        condition or complication
O14.009o Gestational [pregnancy-induced] hypertension with significant proteinuria, unspecified as to
        episode of care, or not applicable
614
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O15
Eclampsia
Includes:
convulsions following conditions in O10-O14 and O16
eclampsia with pregnancy-induced or pre-existing hypertension
Use additional code to identify any associated status epilepticus (G41.0)
O16.009o
O15 Eclampsia Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
              or without mention of condition or condition or to episode of
              mention of postpartum complication complication care, or not
              antepartum condition applicable
              condition 
O15.0 Eclampsia in O15.001o --- O15.003o --- ---
pregnancy 
O15.1 Eclampsia in O15.101o --- O15.103o --- ---
labour 
O15.2 Eclampsia in --- O15.202o --- O15.204o ---
the puerperium 
O15.9 Eclampsia, --- --- --- --- O15.909o
unspecified as to time 
period 
Includes
• Eclampsia NOS
O16
Unspecified maternal hypertension
O16.001o Unspecified maternal hypertension, delivered, with or without mention of antepartum
        condition
O16.002o Unspecified maternal hypertension, delivered, with mention of postpartum complication
O16.003o Unspecified maternal hypertension, antepartum condition or complication
O16.004o Unspecified maternal hypertension, postpartum condition or complication
O16.009o Unspecified maternal hypertension, unspecified as to episode of care, or not applicable
615
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O20
Other maternal disorders predominantly related to pregnancy
(O20-O29)
Note:
Excludes:
O20
Categories O24.- and O25.- include the listed conditions even if they occur during childbirth or the puerperium.
maternal:
•
care related to the fetus and amniotic cavity and possible delivery problems (O30-O48)
•
diseases classifiable elsewhere but complicating pregnancy, labour and delivery, and the puerperium (O98-
O99)
Haemorrhage in early pregnancy
Includes:
Excludes:
Haemorrhage before completion of 20 weeks gestation
pregnancy with abortive outcome (O00-O08)
O20 Haemorrhage in early pregnancy Antepartum Unspecified as to
                                   condition or episode of care, or
                                   complication not applicable
O20.0 Threatened abortion O20.003o O20.009o
O20.8 Other haemorrhage in early pregnancy O20.803o O20.809o
O20.9 Haemorrhage in early pregnancy, O20.903o O20.909o
unspecified 
Includes
• Haemorrhage specified as due to threatened abortion
O21
Excessive vomiting in pregnancy
O21 Excessive vomiting in pregnancy Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
                                    without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                                    antepartum complication not applicable
                                    condition 
O21.0 Mild hyperemesis gravidarum O21.001o O21.003o O21.009o
O21.1 Hyperemesis gravidarum with metabolic O21.101o O21.103o O21.109o
disturbance 
O21.201o O21.203o O21.209o
O21.801o O21.803o O21.809o
O21.901o O21.903o O21.909o
Includes
• Hyperemesis gravidarum, mild or unspecified, starting
before the end of the 22nd week of gestation
Includes
• Hyperemesis gravidarum, starting before the end of the 22nd
week of gestation, with metabolic disturbance such as
carbohydrate depletion
• Hyperemesis gravidarum, starting before the end of the 22nd
week of gestation, with metabolic disturbance such as
dehydration
• Hyperemesis gravidarum, starting before the end of the 22nd
week of gestation, with metabolic disturbance such as
electrolyte imbalance
O21.2 Late vomiting of pregnancy
Includes
• Excessive vomiting starting after 22 completed weeks of
gestation
O21.8 Other vomiting complicating pregnancy
Includes
• Vomiting due to diseases classified elsewhere, complicating
pregnancy
Code Also
• Use additional codes to identify cause
O21.9 Vomiting of pregnancy, unspecified
616
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O22
Venous complications in pregnancy
Excludes:
obstetric pulmonary embolism (O88.-)
the listed conditions as complications of:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy O00-O07,O08
•
childbirth and the puerperium (O87.-)
O22 Venous complications in pregnancy Delivered, with or
without mention of
antepartum
condition
O22
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O22.001o O22.003o O22.009o
O22.101o O22.103o O22.109o
O22.201o O22.203o O22.209o
O22.301o O22.303o O22.309o
O22.4 Haemorrhoids in pregnancy O22.401o O22.403o O22.409o
O22.5 Cerebral venous thrombosis in O22.501o O22.503o O22.509o
pregnancy 
O22.8 Other venous complications in O22.801o O22.803o O22.809o
pregnancy 
O22.9 Venous complication in pregnancy, O22.901o O22.903o O22.909o
unspecified 
O22.0 Varicose veins of lower extremity in
pregnancy
Includes
• Varicose veins NOS in pregnancy
O22.1 Genital varices in pregnancy
Includes
• Perineal varices in pregnancy
• Vaginal varices in pregnancy
• Vulval varices in pregnancy
O22.2 Superficial thrombophlebitis in
pregnancy
Includes
• Thrombophlebitis of legs in pregnancy
O22.3 Deep phlebothrombosis in pregnancy
Includes
• Deep-vein thrombosis, antepartum
Includes
• Cerebrovenous sinus thrombosis in pregnancy
Includes
• Gestational phlebitis NOS
• Gestational phlebopathy NOS
• Gestational thrombosis NOS
617
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O23
Infections of genitourinary tract in pregnancy
Excludes:
O23
puerperal infections(O86.-)
O23 Infections of Delivered, with or Antepartum condition Unspecified as to
genitourinary tract in without mention of or complication episode of care, or not
pregnancy antepartum condition applicable
O23.0 Infections of kidney in O23.001o O23.003o O23.009o
pregnancy 
O23.1 Infections of bladder in O23.101o O23.103o O23.109o
pregnancy 
O23.2 Infections of urethra in O23.201o O23.203o O23.209o
pregnancy 
O23.3 Infections of other parts O23.301o O23.303o O23.309o
of urinary tract in pregnancy 
O23.4 Unspecified infection of O23.401o O23.403o O23.409o
urinary tract in pregnancy 
O23.5 Infections of the genital O23.501o O23.503o O23.509o
tract in pregnancy 
O23.9 Other and unspecified O23.901o O23.903o O23.909o
genitourinary tract infection in 
pregnancy 
Includes
• Genitourinary tract infection in
pregnancy NOS
618
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O24
Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy
Includes:
Diabetes in childbirth and the puerperium
An additional code from the range of E10 - E14 may also be selected to further specify any existing
complication of diabetes.
Use additional code to identify any
•
diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described (E10.64, E11.64, E13.64, E14.64)
O24 Diabetes
mellitus in
pregnancy
Delivered, with
or without
mention of
antepartum
condition
O25.009o
Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
mention of condition or condition or to episode of
postpartum complication complication care, or not
complication applicable
O24.5 O24.502o O24.503o O24.504o O24.509o
Pre-existing O24.501o 
type 1 diabetes mellitus 
in pregnancy 
O24.6 Pre-existing O24.602o O24.603o O24.604o O24.609o
O24.601o 
type 2 diabetes mellitus 
in pregnancy 
O24.7 O24.702o O24.703o O24.704o O24.709o
Pre-existing O24.701o 
diabetes mellitus of 
other or unspecified 
type in pregnancy 
O24.8 O24.802o O24.803o O24.804o O24.809o
Diabetes 
mellitus arising in 
pregnancy 
(gestational) 
O24.801o
Includes
• Diabetes mellitus in
pregnancy, unspecified
O25
Malnutrition in pregnancy
Includes:
Malnutrition in childbirth and the puerperium
O25.001o Malnutrition in pregnancy, delivered, with or without mention of antepartum condition
O25.002o Malnutrition in pregnancy, delivered, with mention of postpartum complication
O25.003o Malnutrition in pregnancy, antepartum condition or complication
O25.004o Malnutrition in pregnancy, postpartum condition or complication
O25.009o Malnutrition in pregnancy, unspecified as to episode of care, or not applicable
619
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O26
O26
Maternal care for other conditions predominantly related to pregnancy
O26 Maternal care for Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
other conditions or without mention of condition or condition or to episode of
predominantly related mention of postpartum complication complication care, or not
to pregnancy antepartum complication applicable
             condition 
O26.0 Excessive weight O26.001o O26.002o O26.003o O26.004o O26.009o
gain in pregnancy 
O26.101o O26.102o O26.103o O26.104o O26.109o
--- O26.203o --- O26.209o
O26.301o O26.302o O26.303o O26.304o O26.309o
Herpes gestationis O26.401o O26.402o O26.403o O26.404o O26.409o
O26.501o O26.502o O26.503o O26.504o O26.509o
O26.6 Liver disorders in O26.601o O26.602o O26.603o O26.604o O26.609o
pregnancy, childbirth and 
the puerperium 
Excludes
• gestational oedema
O12.0)(O12.2
O26.1 Low weight gain
in pregnancy
O26.2 Pregnancy care of O26.201o
habitual aborter
Excludes
• habitual aborter with current
abortion (O03-O06)
O26.3 Retained
intrauterine contraceptive
device in pregnancy
O26.4
O26.5 Maternal
hypotension syndrome
Includes
• Supine hypotensive syndrome
Includes
• Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
• Acute fatty metamorphosis of
the liver in pregnancy
• Cholestasis (intrahepatic) in
pregnacy
• Obstetric cholestasis
Excludes
• hepatorenal syndrome following
labour and delivery (O90.4)
O26.7 Subluxation of O26.701o O26.702o O26.703o O26.704o O26.709o
symphysis (pubis) in 
pregnancy, childbirth and 
the puerperium 
O26.8 Other specified O26.801o O26.802o O26.803o O26.804o O26.809o
pregnancy-related 
conditions 
--- O26.903o --- O26.909o
Includes
• Conditions in N00-N07, N13.0-
N13.5, N13.7-N13.9 and N17-
N19
• Exhaustion and fatigue
pregnancy-related
• Peripheral neuritis pregnancy-
related
• Renal disease pregnancy-related
O26.9 Pregnancy-related O26.901o
condition, unspecified
620
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O28
Abnormal findings on antenatal screening of mother
Excludes:
diagnostic findings classified elsewhere - see Alphabetical Index
maternal care related to the fetus and amniotic cavity and possible delivery problems (O30-O48)
O28 Abnormal findings on antenatal
screening of mother
Delivered, with
or without
mention of
antepartum
condition
O28
Delivered, with Antepartum Unspecified as
mention of condition or to episode of
postpartum complication care or not
complication applicable
O28.0 Abnormal haematological finding on O28.001o O28.002o O28.003o O28.009o
antenatal screening of mother 
O28.1 Abnormal biochemical finding on O28.101o O28.102o O28.103o O28.109o
antenatal screening of mother 
O28.2 Abnormal cytological finding on O28.201o O28.202o O28.203o O28.209o
antenatal screening of mother 
O28.3 Abnormal ultrasonic finding on O28.301o O28.302o O28.303o O28.309o
antenatal screening of mother 
O28.4 Abnormal radiological finding on O28.401o O28.402o O28.403o O28.409o
antenatal screening of mother 
O28.5 Abnormal chromosomal and genetic O28.501o O28.502o O28.503o O28.509o
finding on antenatal screening of mother 
O28.8 Other abnormal findings on antenatal O28.801o O28.802o O28.803o O28.809o
screening of mother 
O28.9 Abnormal finding on antenatal O28.902o O28.903o O28.909o
screening of mother, unspecified 
O28.901o
621
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O29
Complications of anaesthesia during pregnancy
Includes:
O29
Excludes:
maternal complications arising from the administration of a general or local anaesthetic,
analgesic or other sedation during pregnancy
complications of anaesthesia during:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O08)
•
labour and delivery (O74.-)
•
puerperium (O89.-)
O29 Complications of anaesthesia during Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
pregnancy without mention of condition or episode of care, or
          antepartum complication not applicable
          condition 
O29.0 Pulmonary complications of anaesthesia O29.001o O29.003o O29.009o
during pregnancy 
O29.101o O29.103o O29.109o
O29.201o O29.203o O29.209o
O29.3 Toxic reaction to local anaesthesia during O29.301o O29.303o O29.309o
pregnancy 
O29.4 Spinal and epidural anaesthesia-induced O29.401o O29.403o O29.409o
headache during pregnancy 
O29.5 Other complications of spinal and epidural O29.501o O29.503o O29.509o
anaesthesia during pregnancy 
O29.6 Failed or difficult intubation during pregnancy O29.601o O29.603o O29.609o
O29.8 Other complications of anaesthesia during O29.801o O29.803o O29.809o
pregnancy 
O29.9 Complication of anaesthesia during O29.901o O29.903o O29.909o
pregnancy, unspecified 
Includes
• Aspiration pneumonitis due to anaesthesia during pregnancy
• Inhalation of stomach contents or secretions NOS due to
anaesthesia during pregnancy
• Mendelson's syndrome due to anaesthesia during pregnancy
• Pressure collapse of lung due to anaesthesia during pregnancy
O29.1 Cardiac complications of anaesthesia during
pregnancy
Includes
• Cardiac arrest due to anaesthesia during pregnancy
• Cardiac failure due to anaesthesia during pregnancy
O29.2 Central nervous system complications of
anaesthesia during pregnancy
Includes
• Cerebral anoxia due to anaesthesia during pregnancy
622
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
Maternal care related to the fetus and amniotic cavity and
possible delivery problems
(O30-O48)
O30
O31
Multiple gestation
Excludes:
complications specific to multiple gestation (O31.-)
O30 Multiple gestation Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
                       without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                       antepartum complication not applicable
                       condition 
O30.0 Twin pregnancy O30.001o O30.003o O30.009o
O30.1 Triplet pregnancy O30.101o O30.103o O30.109o
O30.2 Quadruplet pregnancy O30.201o O30.203o O30.209o
O30.8 Other multiple gestation O30.801o O30.803o O30.809o
O30.9 Multiple gestation, unspecified O30.901o O30.903o O30.909o
Includes
• Multiple pregnancy NOS
O31
Complications specific to multiple gestation
Excludes:
conjoined twins causing disproportion (O33.7-)
delayed delivery of second twin, triplet, etc. (O63.2-)
malpresentation of one fetus or more (O32.5-)
with obstructed labour (O64-O66)
O31 Complications specific to multiple Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
gestation without mention of condition or episode of care, or
          antepartum complication not applicable
          condition 
O31.0 Papyraceous fetus O31.001o O31.003o O31.009o
O31.11 Continuing pregnancy after O31.111o O31.113o O31.119o
spontaneous abortion of one fetus or more 
O31.12 Continuing pregnancy after selective O31.121o O31.123o O31.129o
fetal reduction of one fetus or more 
O31.2 Continuing pregnancy after intrauterine O31.201o O31.203o O31.209o
death of one fetus or more 
O31.8 Other complications specific to multiple O31.801o O31.803o O31.809o
gestation 
Includes
• Fetus compressus
623
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O32
Maternal care for known or suspected malpresentation of fetus
Includes:
O32
Excludes:
the listed conditions as a reason for observation, hospitalization or other obstetric care of the
mother, or for caesarean section before onset of labour
the listed conditions with obstructed labour (O64.-)
O32 Maternal care for known or Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
suspected malpresentation of fetus without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                                   antepartum complication not applicable
                                   condition 
O32.0 Maternal care for unstable lie O32.001o O32.003o O32.009o
O32.1 Maternal care for breech presentation O32.101o O32.103o O32.109o
O32.2 Maternal care for transverse and oblique O32.201o O32.203o O32.209o
lie 
Includes
• Buttocks presentation
• Breech
• Complete breech
• Footling breech
• Frank breech
• Incomplete breech
Includes
• Presentation oblique
• Presentation transverse
O32.3 Maternal care for face, brow and chin O32.301o O32.303o O32.309o
presentation 
O32.4 Maternal care for high head at term O32.401o O32.403o O32.409o
O32.5 Maternal care for multiple gestation with O32.501o O32.503o O32.509o
malpresentation of one fetus or more 
O32.6 Maternal care for compound O32.601o O32.603o O32.609o
presentation 
O32.8 Maternal care for other malpresentation O32.801o O32.803o O32.809o
of fetus 
O32.9 Maternal care for malpresentation of O32.903o O32.909o
fetus, unspecified 
Includes
• Failure of head to enter pelvic brim
624
O32.901o
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O33
Maternal care for known or suspected disproportion
Includes:
Excludes:
the listed conditions as a reason for observation, hospitalization or other obstetric care of the
mother, or for caesarean section before onset of labour
the listed conditions with obstructed labour (O65-O66)
O33
O33 Maternal care for known or Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
suspected disproportion without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                        antepartum complication not applicable
                        condition 
O33.0 Maternal care for disproportion due to O33.001o O33.003o O33.009o
deformity of maternal pelvic bones 
O33.101o O33.103o O33.109o
O33.201o O33.203o O33.209o
O33.301o O33.303o O33.309o
O33.4 Maternal care for disproportion of mixed O33.401o O33.403o O33.409o
maternal and fetal origin 
O33.5 Maternal care for disproportion due to O33.501o O33.503o O33.509o
unusually large fetus 
O33.6 Maternal care for disproportion due to O33.601o O33.603o O33.609o
hydrocephalic fetus 
O33.7 Maternal care for disproportion due to O33.701o O33.703o O33.709o
other fetal deformities 
O33.8 Maternal care for disproportion of other O33.801o O33.803o O33.809o
origin 
O33.9 Maternal care for disproportion, O33.903o O33.909o
unspecified 
Includes
• Pelvic deformity causing disproportion NOS
O33.1 Maternal care for disproportion due to
generally contracted pelvis
Includes
• Contracted pelvis NOS causing disproportion
O33.2 Maternal care for disproportion due to
inlet contraction of pelvis
Includes
• Inlet contraction (pelvis) causing disproportion
O33.3 Maternal care for disproportion due to
outlet contraction of pelvis
Includes
• Mid-cavity contraction (pelvis) causing disproportion
• Outlet contraction (pelvis) causing disproportion
Includes
• Disproportion of fetal origin with normally formed fetus
• Fetal disproportion NOS
Includes
• Conjoined twins causing disproportion
• Fetal ascites causing disproportion
• Fetal hydrops causing disproportion
• Fetal meningomyelocele causing disproportion
• Fetal sacral teratoma causing disproportion
• Fetal tumour causing disproportion
O33.901o
Includes
• Cephalopelvic disproportion NOS
• Fetopelvic disproportion NOS
625
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O34
Maternal care for known or suspected abnormality of pelvic organs
Includes:
O34
Excludes:
the listed conditions as a reason for observation, hospitalization or other obstetric care of the
mother, or for caesarean section before onset of labour
the listed conditions with obstructed labour (O65.5) and (O66.-)
O34 Maternal care for Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
known or suspected or without mention of condition or to episode of
abnormality of pelvic mention of condition or complication care, or not
organs antepartum postpartum applicable
       condition complication 
                 complication 
O34.0 Maternal care for O34.001o O34.002o O34.003o O34.004o O34.009o
congenital malformation of 
uterus 
O34.101o O34.102o O34.103o O34.104o O34.109o
--- O34.203o --- O34.209o
--- O34.293o --- O34.299o
O34.301o O34.302o O34.303o O34.304o O34.309o
O34.4 Maternal care for O34.402o O34.403o O34.404o O34.409o
O34.401o 
other abnormalities of cervix 
Includes
• Maternal care for double uterus
• Maternal care for uterus bicornis
O34.1 Maternal care for
tumour of corpus uteri
Includes
• Maternal care for polyp of corpus
uteri
• Maternal care for uterine fibroid
Excludes
• maternal care for tumour of cervix
(O34.4)
O34.20 Uterine scar due to O34.201o
previous Caesarean section
Includes
• Caesarean section with previous
caesarean section (scar)
• Maternal care for scar from
previous caesarean section
Excludes
• vaginal delivery following
previous caesarean section NOS
[VBAC] (O75.7)
O34.29 Uterine scar due to O34.291o
other and unspecified
previous surgery
Includes
• Maternal care for uterine scar from
previous surgery
Excludes
• vaginal delivery following
previous caesarean section
NOS(O75.7)
O34.3 Maternal care for
cervical incompetence
Includes
• Maternal care for cerclage with or
without mention of cervical
incompetence
• Maternal care for Shirodkar suture
with or without mention of
cervical incompetence
Includes
• Maternal care for polyp of cervix
• Maternal care for previous surgery
to cervix
• Maternal care for stricture or
stenosis of cervix
• Maternal care for tumour of cervix
626
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O34 Maternal care for
known or suspected
abnormality of pelvic
organs
Delivered, with
or without
mention of
antepartum
condition
Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
mention of condition or to episode of
condition or complication care, or not
postpartum applicable
complication 
complication 
O34.502o O34.503o O34.504o O34.509o
O34.601o O34.602o O34.603o O34.604o O34.609o
O34.701o O34.702o O34.703o O34.704o O34.709o
O34.801o O34.802o O34.803o O34.804o O34.809o
O34.8 Maternal care for 
other abnormalities of pelvic 
organs 
O34.902o O34.903o O34.904o O34.909o
O34.5 Maternal care for
O34.501o
other abnormalities of gravid
uterus
Includes
• Maternal care for incarceration of
gravid uterus
• Maternal care for prolapse of
gravid uterus
• Maternal care for retroversion of
gravid uterus
O34.6 Maternal care for
abnormality of vagina
Includes
• Maternal care for previous surgery
to vagina
• Maternal care for septate vagina
• Maternal care for stenosis of
vagina (acquired)(congenital)
• Maternal care for stricture of
vagina
• Maternal care for tumour of vagina
Excludes
• maternal care for vaginal varices in
pregnancy (O22.1)
O34.7 Maternal care for
abnormality of vulva and
perineum
Includes
• Maternal care for fibrosis of
perineum
• Maternal care for previous surgery
to perineum or vulva
• Maternal care for rigid perineum
• Maternal care for tumour of vulva
Excludes
• maternal care for perineal and
vulval varices in pregnancy
(O22.1)
Includes
• Maternal care for cystocele
• Maternal care for pelvic floor
repair (previous)
• Maternal care for pendulous
abdomen
• Maternal care for rectocele
• Maternal care for rigid pelvic floor
O34.9 Maternal care for
O34.901o
abnormality of pelvic organ,
unspecified
627
O34
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O35
Maternal care for known or suspected fetal abnormality and damage
Includes:
O35
Excludes:
the listed conditions in the fetus as a reason for observation, hospitalization or other obstetric
care of the mother, or for termination of pregnancy
maternal care for known or suspected disproportion (O33.-)
O35 Maternal care for known or suspected fetal Delivered, with or Antepartum
abnormality and damage
without mention of condition or
antepartum
complication
condition
Unspecified as to
episode of care, or
not applicable
O35.001o O35.003o O35.009o
O35.011o O35.013o O35.019o
O35.021o O35.023o O35.029o
O35.03 Maternal care for (suspected) fetal spina bifida O35.031o O35.033o O35.039o
with hydrocephalus 
O35.083o O35.089o
O35.091o O35.093o O35.099o
O35.101o O35.103o O35.109o
O35.2 Maternal care for (suspected) hereditary disease O35.201o O35.203o O35.209o
in fetus 
O35.301o O35.303o O35.309o
O35.401o O35.403o O35.409o
O35.5 Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus by O35.501o O35.503o O35.509o
drugs 
O35.603o O35.609o
O35.00 Maternal care for (suspected) fetal anencephaly
Excludes
• chromosomal abnormality in fetus (O35.1)
O35.01 Maternal care for (suspected) fetal spina bifida
Excludes
• chromosomal abnormality in fetus (O35.1)
O35.02 Maternal care for (suspected) fetal
hydrocephalus
Excludes
• chromosomal abnormality in fetus (O35.1)
Excludes
• chromosomal abnormality in fetus (O35.1)
O35.08 Maternal care for (suspected) other neural tube O35.081o
defects in fetus
Excludes
• chromosomal abnormality in fetus (O35.1)
O35.09 Maternal care for (suspected) central nervous
system malformation in fetus, unspecified
Excludes
• chromosomal abnormality in fetus (O35.1)
O35.1 Maternal care for (suspected) chromosomal
abnormality in fetus
Excludes
• chromosomal abnormality in fetus (O35.1)
O35.3 Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus
from viral disease in mother
Includes
• Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus from maternal
cytomegalovirus infection
• Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus from maternal rubella
O35.4 Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus
from alcohol
Includes
• Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus from drug addiction
Excludes
• fetal distress in labour and delivery due to drug administration (O68.-)
O35.6 Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus by O35.601o
radiation
628
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O35 Maternal care for known or suspected fetal Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
abnormality and damage episode of care, or
without mention of condition or not applicable
antepartum 
complication 
condition 
O35.7 Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus by O35.701o O35.703o O35.709o
other medical procedures 
O35.801o O35.803o O35.809o
O35.9 Maternal care for (suspected) fetal abnormality O35.901o O35.903o O35.909o
and damage, unspecified 
Includes
• Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus by amniocentesis
• Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus by biopsy procedures
• Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus by haematological
investigation
• Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus by intrauterine
contraceptive device
• Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus by intrauterine surgery
O35.8 Maternal care for other (suspected) fetal
abnormality and damage
Includes
• Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus from maternal listeriosis
• Maternal care for (suspected) damage to fetus from maternal
toxoplasmosis
O36
Maternal care for other known or suspected fetal problems
Includes:
Excludes:
O36.0
the listed conditions in the fetus as a reason for observation, hospitalization or other obstetric
care of the mother, or for termination of pregnancy
labour and delivery complicated by fetal stress [distress] (O68.-)
placental transfusion syndromes (O43.-)
Maternal care for rhesus isoimmunization
Includes:
Anti-D [Rh] antibodies
Rh incompatibility (with hydrops fetalis)
O36.0 Maternal care for rhesus
isoimmunization
O36.01 Maternal care for rhesus
isoimmunization, first trimester
Delivered, with or
without mention of
antepartum
condition
---
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O36.013o O36.019o
O36.02 Maternal care for rhesus O36.021o O36.023o O36.029o
isoimmunization, second trimester 
O36.03 Maternal care for rhesus O36.031o O36.033o O36.039o
isoimmunization, third trimester 
O36.09 Maternal care for rhesus O36.091o O36.093o O36.099o
isoimmunization, unspecified trimester 
629
O36.0
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O36.1
O36.1
Maternal care for other isoimmunization
Includes:
ABO isoimmunization
Isoimmunization NOS (with hydrops fetalis)
O36.1 Maternal care for other
isoimmunization
O36.11 Maternal care for other
isoimmunization, first trimester
Delivered, with or
without mention of
antepartum
condition
---
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O36.113o O36.119o
O36.12 Maternal care for other O36.121o O36.123o O36.129o
isoimmunization, second trimester 
O36.13 Maternal care for other O36.131o O36.133o O36.139o
isoimmunization, third trimester 
O36.19 Maternal care for other O36.191o O36.193o O36.199o
isoimmunization, unspecified trimester 
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O36.213o O36.219o
O36.221o O36.223o O36.229o
O36.23 Maternal care for hydrops fetalis, third O36.231o O36.233o O36.239o
trimester 
O36.29 Maternal care for hydrops fetalis, O36.293o O36.299o
unspecified trimester 
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O36.313o O36.319o
O36.2
Maternal care for hydrops fetalis
Includes:
Hydrops fetalis:
•
NOS
•
not associated with isoimmunization
O36.2 Maternal care for hydrops fetalis
O36.21 Maternal care for hydrops fetalis, first
trimester
O36.22 Maternal care for hydrops fetalis,
second trimester
O36.3
Delivered, with or
without mention of
antepartum
condition
---
O36.291o
Maternal care for signs of fetal asphyxia
Includes:
Fetal distress prior to labour
O36.3 Maternal care for signs of fetal
asphyxia
O36.31 Maternal care for signs of fetal asphyxia,
first trimester
Delivered, with or
without mention of
antepartum
condition
---
O36.32 Maternal care for signs of fetal O36.321o O36.323o O36.329o
asphyxia, second trimester 
O36.33 Maternal care for signs of fetal O36.331o O36.333o O36.339o
asphyxia, third trimester 
O36.39 Maternal care for signs of fetal O36.391o O36.393o O36.399o
asphyxia, unspecified trimester 
630
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O36.4
Maternal care for intrauterine death
Excludes:
missed abortion (O02.1)
O36.6
O36.4 Maternal care for intrauterine Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
death without mention of condition or episode of care, or
      antepartum complication not applicable
      condition 
O36.42 Maternal care for intrauterine death, O36.421o O36.423o O36.429o
second trimester 
O36.43 Maternal care for intrauterine death, O36.431o O36.433o O36.439o
third trimester 
O36.49 Maternal care for intrauterine death, O36.491o O36.493o O36.499o
unspecified trimester 
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition and episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O36.513o O36.519o
O36.5
Maternal care for restricted fetal growth
Includes:
Maternal care for known or suspected:
•
light-for-dates
•
placental insufficiency
•
small-for-dates
O36.5 Maternal care for restricted fetal
growth
O36.51 Maternal care for restricted fetal growth,
first trimester
Delivered, with or
without mention of
antepartum
condition
---
O36.52 Maternal care for restricted fetal O36.521o O36.523o O36.529o
growth, second trimester 
O36.53 Maternal care for restricted fetal O36.531o O36.533o O36.539o
growth, third trimester 
O36.59 Maternal care for restricted fetal O36.591o O36.593o O36.599o
growth, unspecified trimester 
O36.6
Maternal care for excessive fetal growth
Includes:
Maternal care for known or suspected large-for-dates
O36.6 Maternal care for excessive fetal
growth
O36.61 Maternal care for excessive fetal
growth, first trimester
Delivered, with or
without mention of
antepartum
condition
---
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O36.613o O36.619o
O36.62 Maternal care for excessive fetal O36.621o O36.623o O36.629o
growth, second trimester 
O36.63 Maternal care for excessive fetal O36.631o O36.633o O36.639o
growth, third trimester 
O36.69 Maternal care for excessive fetal O36.691o O36.693o O36.699o
growth, unspecified trimester 
631
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O36.7
O36.7
Maternal care for viable fetus in abdominal pregnancy
O36.7 Maternal care for viable fetus in
abdominal pregnancy
O36.71 Maternal care for viable fetus in
abdominal pregnancy, first trimester
Delivered, with or
without mention of
antepartum
condition
---
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O36.713o O36.719o
O36.72 Maternal care for viable fetus in O36.721o O36.723o O36.729o
abdominal pregnancy, second trimester 
O36.73 Maternal care for viable fetus in O36.731o O36.733o O36.739o
abdominal pregnancy, third trimester 
O36.79 Maternal care for viable fetus in O36.791o O36.793o O36.799o
abdominal pregnancy, unspecified trimester 
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O36.813o O36.819o
O36.8
Maternal care for other specified fetal problems
O36.8 Maternal care for other specified
fetal problems
O36.81 Maternal care for other specified fetal
problems, first trimester
Delivered, with or
without mention of
antepartum
condition
---
O36.82 Maternal care for other specified fetal O36.821o O36.823o O36.829o
problems, second trimester 
O36.83 Maternal care for other specified fetal O36.831o O36.833o O36.839o
problems, third trimester 
O36.89 Maternal care for other specified fetal O36.891o O36.893o O36.899o
problems, unspecified trimester 
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O36.913o O36.919o
O36.9
Maternal care for fetal problem, unspecified
O36.9 Maternal care for fetal problem,
unspecified
O36.91 Maternal care for fetal problem,
unspecified, first trimester
Delivered, with or
without mention of
antepartum
condition
---
O36.92 Maternal care for fetal problem, O36.921o O36.923o O36.929o
unspecified, second trimester 
O36.93 Maternal care for fetal problem, O36.931o O36.933o O36.939o
unspecified, third trimester 
O36.99 Maternal care for fetal problem, O36.991o O36.993o O36.999o
unspecified, with unspecified trimester 
632
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O37
Maternal care for decreased fetal movements
O37 Maternal care for decreased fetal Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to the
movements without mention of condition or episode, or not
          antepartum complication applicable
          condition 
O37.02 Maternal care for decreased fetal O37.021o O37.023o O37.029o
movements, second trimester 
O37.03 Maternal care for decreased fetal O37.031o O37.033o O37.039o
movements, third trimester 
O37.09 Maternal care for decreased fetal O37.091o O37.093o O37.099o
movements, unspecified trimester 
Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
without mention of condition or episode of care, or
antepartum complication not applicable
condition 
O40
Polyhydramnios
Includes:
Hydramnios
O40 Polyhydramnios
O40.013o O40.019o
O40.02 Polyhydramnios, second trimester 
O40.01 Polyhydramnios, first trimester
O40.021o 
---
O40.023o O40.029o
O40.03 Polyhydramnios, third trimester O40.031o O40.033o O40.039o
O40.09 Polyhydramnios, unspecified trimester O40.091o O40.093o O40.099o
633
O40
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O41
Other disorders of amniotic fluid and membranes
Excludes:
O41
premature rupture of membranes (O42.-)
O41 Other disorders of amniotic fluid and Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
membranes condition or episode of care, or
without mention of complication not applicable
antepartum 
condition 
O41.01 Oligohydramnios, first trimester O41.013o O41.019o
O41.021o O41.023o O41.029o
O41.031o O41.033o O41.039o
O41.09 Oligohydramnios, unspecified trimester O41.091o O41.093o O41.099o
O41.113o O41.119o
O41.121o O41.123o O41.129o
O41.131o O41.133o O41.139o
O41.191o O41.193o O41.199o
O41.813o O41.819o
Includes
• Oligohydramnios without mention of rupture of membranes
O41.02 Oligohydramnios, second trimester
---
Includes
• Oligohydramnios without mention of rupture of membranes
O41.03 Oligohydramnios, third trimester
Includes
• Oligohydramnios without mention of rupture of membranes
Includes
• Oligohydramnios without mention of rupture of membranes
O41.11 Infection of amniotic sac and
membranes, first trimester
O41.12 Infection of amniotic sac and
membranes, second trimester
---
Includes
• Amnionitis
• Chorioamnionitis
• Membranitis
• Placentitis
O41.13 Infection of amniotic sac and
membranes, third trimester
Includes
• Amnionitis
• Chorioamnionitis
• Membranitis
• Placentitis
O41.19 Infection of amniotic sac and
membranes, unspecified trimester
Includes
• Amnionitis
• Chorioamnionitis
• Membranitis
• Placentitis
O41.81 Other specified disorders of amniotic
fluid and membranes, first trimester
---
O41.82 Other specified disorders of amniotic O41.821o O41.823o O41.829o
fluid and membranes, second trimester 
O41.83 Other specified disorders of amniotic O41.831o O41.833o O41.839o
fluid and membranes, third trimester 
O41.89 Other specified disorders of amniotic O41.891o O41.893o O41.899o
fluid and membranes, unspecified trimester 
O41.9 Disorder of amniotic fluid and O41.901o O41.903o O41.909o
membranes, unspecified 
634
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O42
Premature rupture of membranes
O42 Premature rupture of membranes Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
                                   without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                                   antepartum complication not applicable
                                   condition 
O42.01 Premature rupture of membranes, O42.011o O42.013o O42.019o
onset of labour within 24 hours, preterm 
O42.02 Premature rupture of membranes, onset O42.021o O42.023o O42.029o
of labour within 24 hours, full term 
O42.09 Premature rupture of membranes, onset O42.091o O42.093o O42.099o
of labour within 24 hours, unspecified whether 
preterm or full term 
O42.11 Premature rupture of membranes, onset O42.111o O42.113o O42.119o
of labour after 24 hours, preterm 
O42.123o O42.129o
O42.193o O42.199o
O42.203o O42.209o
O42.903o O42.909o
Excludes
• with labour delayed by therapy (O42.2)
O42.12 Premature rupture of membranes, onset O42.121o
of labour after 24 hours, full term
Excludes
• with labour delayed by therapy (O42.2)
O42.19 Premature rupture of membranes, onset O42.191o
of labour after 24 hours, unspecified whether
preterm or full term
Excludes
• with labour delayed by therapy (O42.2)
O42.2 Premature rupture of membranes,
labour delayed by therapy
O42.9 Premature rupture of membranes,
unspecified
---
---
635
O42
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O43
Placental disorders
Excludes:
O43
maternal care for poor fetal growth due to placental insufficiency (O36.5)
placenta praevia (O44.-)
premature separation of placenta [abruptio placentae] (O45.-)
O43 Placental disorders Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
                        without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                        antepartum complication not applicable
                        condition 
O43.00 Fetomaternal transfusion syndromes O43.001o O43.003o O43.009o
O43.011o O43.013o O43.019o
O43.09 Unspecified placental transfusion O43.091o O43.093o O43.099o
syndrome 
O43.1 Malformation of placenta O43.101o O43.103o O43.109o
O43.201o O43.203o O43.209o
O43.80 Placental dysfunction O43.801o O43.803o O43.809o
O43.81 Placental infarction O43.811o O43.813o O43.819o
Includes
• Maternofetal transfusion
O43.01 Fetus to fetus transfusion syndromes
Includes
• Twin-to-twin transfusion
Includes
• Abnormal placenta NOS
• Circumvallate placenta
• Succenturiate placenta
O43.2 Morbidly adherent placenta
Includes
• Placenta accreta
• Placenta increta
• Placenta percreta
Code Also
• any associated postpartum haemorrhage, third stage (O72.0-
)
• any associated retained placenta without haemorrhage
(O73.0-)
O43.88 Other specified placental disorder O43.881o O43.883o O43.889o
O43.9 Placental disorder, unspecified O43.901o O43.903o O43.909o
O44 Placenta praevia Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
                     without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                     antepartum complication not applicable
                     condition 
O44.0 Placenta praevia specified as without O44.001o O44.003o O44.009o
haemorrhage 
O44.101o O44.103o O44.109o
O44
Placenta praevia
Includes
• Low implantation of placenta specified as without
haemorrhage
O44.1 Placenta praevia with haemorrhage
Includes
• Low implantation of placenta, NOS or with haemorrhage
• Placenta praevia marginal NOS or with haemorrhage
• Placenta praevia partial NOS or with haemorrhage
• Placenta praevia total NOS or with haemorrhage
Excludes
• labour and delivery complicated by hemorrhage from vasa
praevia (O69.4)
636
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O45
Premature separation of placenta [abruptio placentae]
O45 Premature separation of placenta
[abruptio placentae]
Delivered, with or
without mention of
antepartum
condition
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O45.003o O45.009o
O45.013o O45.019o
O45.083o O45.089o
O45.09 Premature separation of placenta with O45.091o O45.093o O45.099o
coagulation defect, unspecified 
O45.8 Other premature separation of placenta O45.801o O45.803o O45.809o
O45.901o O45.903o O45.909o
O45.00 Premature separation of placenta with O45.001o
afibrinogenemia
Includes
• Abruptio placentae with (excessive) haemorrhage
associated with afibrinogenaemia
O45.01 Premature separation of placenta with O45.011o
disseminated intravascular coagulation
Includes
• Abruptio placentae with (excessive) haemorrhage
associated with disseminated intravascular coagulation
O45.08 Premature separation of placenta with O45.081o
other coagulation defect
Includes
• Abruptio placentae with (excessive) haemorrhage
associated with hyperfibrinolysis
• Abruptio placentae with (excessive) haemorrhage
associated with hypofibrinogenaemia
O45.9
Premature separation of placenta,
unspecified
Includes
• Abruptio placentae NOS
637
O45
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O46
Antepartum haemorrhage, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
O46
haemorrhage in early pregnancy (O20.-)
intrapartum haemorrhage NEC (O67.-)
placenta praevia (O44.-)
premature separation of placenta [abruptio placentae] (O45.-)
O46 Antepartum haemorrhage, not Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
elsewhere classified without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                     antepartum complication not applicable
                     condition 
O46.00 Antepartum haemorrhage with O46.001o O46.003o O46.009o
afibrinogenaemia 
O46.011o O46.013o O46.019o
O46.081o O46.083o O46.089o
O46.09 Antepartum haemorrhage with O46.091o O46.093o O46.099o
coagulation defect, unspecified 
O46.8 Other antepartum haemorrhage O46.801o O46.803o O46.809o
O46.9 Antepartum haemorrhage, unspecified O46.901o O46.903o O46.909o
Includes
• Antepartum haemorrhage (excessive) associated with
afibrinogenaemia
O46.01 Antepartum haemorrhage with
disseminated intravascular coagulation
Includes
• Antepartum haemorrhage (excessive) associated with
disseminated intravascular coagulation
O46.08 Antepartum haemorrhage with other
coagulation defects
Includes
• Antepartum haemorrhage (excessive) associated with
hyperfibrinolysis
• Antepartum haemorrhage (excessive) associated with
hypofibrinogenaemia
O47
False labour
Excludes:
preterm labour delayed by therapy (O60.-)
O47.003o False labour before 37 completed weeks of gestation, antepartum condition or complication
O47.103o False labour at or after 37 completed weeks of gestation, antepartum condition or
        complication
O47.903o False labour, unspecified, antepartum condition or complication
O48
Prolonged pregnancy
Includes:
Post-dates 41 completed weeks
Post-term
O48.001o Prolonged pregnancy, delivered, with or without mention of antepartum condition
O48.003o Prolonged pregnancy, antepartum condition or complication
O48.009o Prolonged pregnancy, unspecified as to episode of care, or not applicable
638
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
Complications of labour and delivery
(O60-O75)
O60
O61
Preterm labour and delivery
Includes:
Onset (spontaneous) of labour before 37 completed weeks of gestation
O60.0 Preterm labour without delivery
     Includes:
    Preterm labour
   •
    induced
   •
    spontaneous
O60.003o Preterm labour without delivery, antepartum condition or complication
O60.1 Preterm spontaneous labour with preterm delivery
O60.101o Preterm spontaneous labour with preterm delivery, with or without mention of antepartum
        condition
       Includes:
      Preterm labour with delivery NOS
     Preterm spontaneous labour with preterm delivery by caesarean section
    Excludes:
   Preterm induced labour with preterm delivery (O60.3)
O60.2 Preterm spontaneous labour with term delivery
O60.201o Preterm spontaneous labour with term delivery, with or without mention of antepartum
        condition
       Includes:
      Preterm labour (medically) delayed for term delivery
     Preterm spontaneous labour with term delivery by caesarean section
O60.3 Preterm delivery without spontaneous labour
O60.301o Preterm delivery without spontaneous labour, with or without mention of antepartum
        condition
       Includes:
      Preterm delivery by
     •
      caesarean section, without spontaneous labour
     •
      induction
O61
Failed induction of labour
O61 Failed induction of labour Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
                               without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                               antepartum complication not applicable
                               condition 
O61.0 Failed medical induction of labour O61.001o O61.003o O61.009o
O61.101o O61.103o O61.109o
O61.8 Other failed induction of labour O61.801o O61.803o O61.809o
O61.9 Failed induction of labour, unspecified O61.901o O61.903o O61.909o
Includes
• Failed induction (of labour) by oxytocin
• Failed induction (of labour) by prostaglandins
O61.1 Failed instrumental induction of labour
Includes
• Failed induction (of labour) mechanical
• Failed induction (of labour) surgical
639
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O62
Abnormalities of forces of labour
Includes:
O62
failure to progress due to uterine inertia
O62 Abnormalities of forces of labour Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
                                      without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                                      antepartum complication not applicable
                                      condition 
O62.0 Primary inadequate contractions O62.001o O62.003o O62.009o
O62.101o O62.103o O62.109o
O62.201o O62.203o O62.209o
O62.301o O62.303o O62.309o
O62.4 Hypertonic, incoordinate, and prolonged O62.401o O62.403o O62.409o
uterine contractions 
O62.8 Other abnormalities of forces of labour O62.801o O62.803o O62.809o
O62.9 Abnormality of forces of labour, O62.901o O62.903o O62.909o
unspecified 
O63 Long labour Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
                without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                antepartum complication not applicable
                condition 
O63.0 Prolonged first stage (of labour) O63.001o O63.003o O63.009o
O63.1 Prolonged second stage (of labour) O63.101o O63.103o O63.109o
Includes
• Failure of cervical dilatation
• Primary hypotonic uterine dysfunction
• Uterine inertia during latent phase of labour
O62.1 Secondary uterine inertia
Includes
• Arrested active phase of labour
• Secondary hypotonic uterine dysfunction
O62.2 Other uterine inertia
Includes
• Atony of uterus
• Desultory labour
• Failure to progress NOS
• Hypotonic uterine dysfunction NOS
• Irregular labour
• Poor contractions
• Uterine inertia NOS
O62.3 Precipitate labour
Includes
• Contraction ring dystocia
• Dyscoordinate labour
• Hour-glass contraction of uterus
• Hypertonic uterine dysfunction
• Incoordinate uterine action
• Tetanic contractions
• Uterine dystocia NOS
Excludes
• dystocia (fetal) (maternal) NOS (O66.9)
O63
Long labour
O63.2 Delayed delivery of second twin, triplet, O63.201o
etc.
O63.9 Long labour, unspecified
Includes
• Prolonged labour NOS
640
O63.901o
---
O63.903o
O63.209o
O63.909o
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O64
Obstructed labour due to malposition and malpresentation of fetus
O64 Obstructed labour due to
Delivered, with or
malposition and malpresentation of fetus without mention of
antepartum
condition
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O64.001o O64.003o O64.009o
O64.101o O64.103o O64.109o
O64.201o O64.203o O64.209o
O64.3 Obstructed labour due to brow O64.301o O64.303o O64.309o
presentation 
O64.4 Obstructed labour due to shoulder O64.401o O64.403o O64.409o
presentation 
O64.5 Obstructed labour due to compound O64.501o O64.503o O64.509o
presentation 
O64.8 Obstructed labour due to other O64.801o O64.803o O64.809o
malposition and malpresentation 
O64.9 Obstructed labour due to malposition O64.901o O64.903o O64.909o
and malpresentation, unspecified 
O64.0 Obstructed labour due to incomplete
rotation of fetal head
Includes
• Deep transverse arrest
• Obstructed labour due to persistent (position) occipitoiliac
• Obstructed labour due to persistent (position)
occipitoposterior
• Obstructed labour due to persistent (position) occipitosacral
• Obstructed labour due to persistent (position)
occipitotransverse
O64.1 Obstructed labour due to breech
presentation
Includes
• Breech
• Buttocks presentation
• Complete breech
• Footling breech
• Frank breech
• Incomplete breech
O64.2 Obstructed labour due to face
presentation
Includes
• Obstructed labour due to chin presentation
Includes
• Prolapsed arm
Excludes
• impacted shoulders (O66.0)
641
O64
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O65
O65
Obstructed labour due to maternal pelvic abnormality
O65 Obstructed labour due to maternal Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
pelvic abnormality without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                   antepartum complication not applicable
                   condition 
O65.0 Obstructed labour due to deformed O65.001o O65.003o O65.009o
pelvis 
O65.1 Obstructed labour due to generally O65.101o O65.103o O65.109o
contracted pelvis 
O65.2 Obstructed labour due to pelvic inlet O65.201o O65.203o O65.209o
contraction 
O65.3 Obstructed labour due to pelvic outlet O65.301o O65.303o O65.309o
and mid-cavity contraction 
O65.4 Obstructed labour due to fetopelvic O65.401o O65.403o O65.409o
disproportion, unspecified 
O65.5 Obstructed labour due to abnormality of O65.501o O65.503o O65.509o
maternal pelvic organs 
O65.8 Obstructed labour due to other maternal O65.801o O65.803o O65.809o
pelvic abnormalities 
O65.9 Obstructed labour due to maternal pelvic O65.901o O65.903o O65.909o
abnormality, unspecified 
Excludes
• dystocia due to abnormality of fetus (O66.2 - O66.3)
Includes
• Obstructed labour due to conditions listed in O34.-
O66
Other obstructed labour
O66 Other obstructed labour Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
                            without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                            antepartum complication not applicable
                            condition 
O66.0 O66.001o O66.003o O66.009o
dystocia 
Obstructed labour due to locked twins O66.101o O66.103o O66.109o
Obstructed labour due to shoulder
Includes
• Impacted shoulders
O66.1
O66.2 O66.201o O66.203o O66.209o
Obstructed labour due to unusually 
large fetus 
O66.3 O66.301o O66.303o O66.309o
Obstructed labour due to other 
abnormalities of fetus 
O66.401o O66.403o O66.409o
O66.491o O66.493o O66.499o
Includes
• Dystocia due to conjoined twins
• Dystocia due to fetal ascites
• Dystocia due to fetal hydrops
• Dystocia due to fetal meningomyelocele
• Dystocia due to fetal sacral teratoma
• Dystocia due to fetal tumour
• Dystocia due to hydrocephalic fetus
O66.40
Failed trial of labour following
previous caesarean
Includes
• Failed vaginal birth after caesarean
O66.49 Failed trial of labour, unspecified
642
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O66 Other obstructed labour
Delivered, with or
without mention of
antepartum
condition
O66.5 Failed application of vacuum extractor O66.501o
and forceps, unspecified
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O66.503o O66.509o
Includes
• Failed application of ventouse or forceps, with subsequent
delivery by forceps or caesarean section respectively
O66.8 Other specified obstructed labour O66.801o O66.803o O66.809o
O66.9 Obstructed labour, unspecified O66.901o O66.903o O66.909o
Includes
• Dystocia fetal NOS
• Dystocia maternal NOS
• Dystocia NOS
O67
Labour and delivery complicated by intrapartum haemorrhage, not
elsewhere classified
Excludes:
antepartum haemorrhage NEC (O46.-)
placenta praevia (O44.-)
postpartum haemorrhage (O72.-)
premature separation of placenta [abruptio placentae] (O45.-)
O67 Labour and delivery complicated by Delivered, with or
intrapartum haemorrhage, not elsewhere without mention of
classified
antepartum
condition
O67.0 Intrapartum haemorrhage with
coagulation defect
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O67.001o O67.003o O67.009o
O67.801o O67.803o O67.809o
O67.901o O67.903o O67.909o
Includes
• Intrapartum haemorrhage (excessive) associated with
afibrinogenaemia
• Intrapartum haemorrhage (excessive) associated with
disseminated intravascular coagulation
• Intrapartum haemorrhage (excessive) associated with
hyperfibrinolysis
• Intrapartum haemorrhage (excessive) associated with
hypofibrinogenaemia
O67.8 Other intrapartum haemorrhage
Includes
• Excessive intrapartum haemorrhage
O67.9 Intrapartum haemorrhage, unspecified
643
O67
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O68
Labour and delivery complicated by fetal stress [distress]
Includes:
O68
fetal distress in labour or delivery due to drug administration
O68 Labour and delivery complicated by Delivered, with or
fetal stress [distress]
without mention of
antepartum
condition
Antepartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not applicable
O68.001o O68.003o O68.009o
O68.101o O68.103o O68.109o
O68.2 Labour and delivery complicated by O68.201o O68.203o O68.209o
fetal heart rate anomaly with meconium in 
amniotic fluid 
O68.3 Labour and delivery complicated by O68.301o O68.303o O68.309o
evidence of fetal asphyxia 
O68.0 Labour and delivery complicated by
fetal heart rate anomaly
Includes
• Fetal bradycardia
• Fetal heart rate irregularity
• Fetal tachycardia
• Non-reassuring fetal heart rate
Excludes
• with meconium in amniotic fluid (O68.2)
O68.1 Labour and delivery complicated by
meconium in amniotic fluid
Excludes
• with fetal heart rate anomaly (O68.2)
Includes
• Abnormal fetal acid-base balance
• Abnormal fetal acidaemia
O69
Labour and delivery complicated by umbilical cord complications
O69 Labour and delivery complicated by Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
umbilical cord complications condition or episode of care, or
without mention of complication not applicable
antepartum 
condition 
O69.0 Labour and delivery complicated by O69.001o O69.003o O69.009o
prolapse of cord 
O69.1 Labour and delivery complicated by O69.101o O69.103o O69.109o
cord around neck, with compression 
O69.2 Labour and delivery complicated by O69.201o O69.203o O69.209o
other cord entanglement 
O69.3 Labour and delivery complicated by O69.301o O69.303o O69.309o
short cord 
O69.4 Labour and delivery complicated by O69.401o O69.403o O69.409o
vasa praevia 
O69.501o O69.503o O69.509o
Includes
• Entanglement of cords of twins in monoamniotic sac
• Knot in cord
Includes
• Haemorrhage from vasa praevia
O69.5 Labour and delivery complicated by
vascular lesion of cord
Includes
• Cord bruising
• Cord haematoma
• Thrombosis of umbilical vessels
644
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O69 Labour and delivery complicated by Delivered, with or Antepartum Unspecified as to
umbilical cord complications condition or episode of care, or
without mention of complication not applicable
antepartum 
condition 
O69.8 Labour and delivery complicated by O69.801o O69.803o O69.809o
other cord complications 
O69.9 Labour and delivery complicated by O69.901o O69.903o O69.909o
cord complication, unspecified 
O70
Perineal laceration during delivery
Includes:
Excludes:
episiotomy extended by laceration
obstetric high vaginal laceration alone (O71.4-)
O70 Perineal laceration during delivery Delivered, with or Postpartum Unspecified as to
                                        without mention of condition or episode of care, or
                                        antepartum complication not applicable
                                        condition 
O70.0 First degree perineal laceration during O70.001o O70.004o O70.009o
delivery 
O70.1 Second degree perineal laceration during O70.101o O70.104o O70.109o
delivery 
O70.204o O70.209o
O70.304o O70.309o
O70.904o O70.909o
Includes
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear (involving) fourchette
during delivery
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear (involving) labia during
delivery
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear (involving) skin during
delivery
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear (involving) slight during
delivery
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear (involving) vagina during
delivery
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear (involving) vulva during
delivery
Includes
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear as in O70.0, also
involving pelvic floor during delivery
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear as in O70.0, also
involving perineal muscles during delivery
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear as in O70.0, also
involving vaginal muscles during delivery
Excludes
• that involving anal sphincter (O70.2)
O70.2 Third degree perineal laceration during O70.201o
delivery
Includes
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear as in O70.1, also
involving anal sphincter during delivery
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear as in O70.1, also
involving rectovaginal septum during delivery
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear as in O70.1, also
involving sphincter NOS during delivery
Excludes
• that involving anal or rectal mucosa (O70.3)
O70.3 Fourth degree perineal laceration during O70.301o
delivery
Includes
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear as in O70.2, also
involving anal mucosa during delivery
• Perineal laceration, rupture or tear as in O70.2, also
involving rectal mucosa during delivery
O70.9 Perineal laceration during delivery,
unspecified
O70.901o
645
O70
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O71
Other obstetric trauma
Includes:
O71
damage from instruments during vaginal delivery or caesarian section
O71 Other obstetric Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
trauma mention of condition or condition or to episode of
or without postpartum complication complication care, or not
mention of complication applicable
antepartum 
condition 
O71.00 Dehiscence O71.001o --- O71.003o --- O71.009o
(without extension) of 
old uterine scar before 
onset of labour 
O71.01 Dehiscence of O71.011o --- O71.013o --- O71.019o
old uterine scar with 
extension before onset 
of labour 
O71.08 Other rupture O71.081o --- O71.083o --- O71.089o
of uterus before onset 
of labour 
O71.10 Dehiscence --- --- --- O71.109o
O71.101o 
(without extension) of 
old uterine scar during 
labour 
--- --- --- O71.119o
--- --- --- O71.189o
Includes
• Uterine dehiscence NOS,
before onset of labour
Includes
• Rupture of uterus not stated
as occurring before onset of
labour
• Uterine dehiscence NOS,
during labour
O71.11 Dehiscence of O71.111o
uterus with extension
during labour
Includes
• Rupture of uterus not stated
as occurring before onset of
labour
O71.18 Other rupture O71.181o
of uterus during labour
Includes
• Rupture of uterus not stated
as occurring before onset of
labour
O71.2 Postpartum --- O71.202o --- O71.204o O71.209o
inversion of uterus 
O71.3 Obstetric O71.301o --- --- O71.304o O71.309o
laceration of cervix 
Includes
• Annular detachment of
cervix
646
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O71 Other obstetric Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
trauma mention of condition or condition or to episode of
or without postpartum complication complication care, or not
mention of complication applicable
antepartum 
condition 
O71.4 Obstetric high O71.401o --- --- O71.404o O71.409o
vaginal laceration 
alone 
--- --- O71.504o O71.509o
--- --- O71.604o O71.609o
--- --- O71.704o O71.709o
O71.8 Other specified O71.801o O71.802o O71.803o O71.804o O71.809o
obstetric trauma 
O71.9 Obstetric O71.902o O71.903o O71.904o O71.909o
trauma, unspecified 
Includes
• Laceration of middle or
upper third of vaginal wall
without mention of perineal
laceration
Excludes
• with perineal laceration
(O70.-)
O71.5 Other obstetric O71.501o
injury to pelvic organs
Includes
• Obstetric injury to bladder
• Obstetric injury to urethra
O71.6 Obstetric
O71.601o
damage to pelvic joints
and ligaments
Includes
• Avulsion of inner
symphyseal cartilage
obstetric
• Damage to coccyx obstetric
• Traumatic separation of
symphysis (pubis) obstetric
O71.7 Obstetric
haematoma of pelvis
O71.701o
Includes
• Obstetric haematoma of
perineum
• Obstetric haematoma of
vagina
• Obstetric haematoma of
vulva
O71.901o
647
O71
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O72
Postpartum haemorrhage
Includes:
O72
haemorrhage after delivery of fetus or infant
O72 Postpartum haemorrhage Delivered, with Postpartum Unspecified as to
                           mention of condition or episode of care, or
                           postpartum complication not applicable
                           complication 
O72.0 Third-stage haemorrhage O72.002o O72.004o O72.009o
O72.102o O72.104o O72.109o
O72.202o O72.204o O72.209o
O72.302o O72.304o O72.309o
Includes
• Haemorrhage associated with retained, trapped or adherent
placenta
• Retained placenta NOS
Code Also
• any morbidly adherent placenta (O43.2.-)
O72.1 Other immediate postpartum
haemorrhage
Includes
• Haemorrhage following delivery of placenta
• Postpartum haemorrhage (atonic) NOS
O72.2 Delayed and secondary postpartum
haemorrhage
Includes
• Haemorrhage associated with retained portions of placenta
or membranes
• Retained products of conception NOS, following delivery
O72.3 Postpartum coagulation defects
Includes
• Postpartum afibrinogenaemia
• Postpartum fibrinolysis
O73
Retained placenta and membranes, without haemorrhage
O73 Retained placenta and membranes, Delivered, with Postpartum Unspecified as to
without haemorrhage mention of condition or episode of care, or
                    postpartum complication not applicable
                    complication 
O73.0 Retained placenta without haemorrhage O73.002o O73.004o O73.009o
O73.102o O73.104o O73.109o
Code Also
• any morbidly adherent placenta (O43.2.-)
O73.1 Retained portions of placenta and
membranes, without haemorrhage
Includes
• Retained products of conception following delivery, without
haemorrhage
648
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O74
Complications of anaesthesia during labour and delivery
Includes:
maternal complications arising from the administration of a general or local anaesthetic,
analgesic or other sedation during labour and delivery
O74
O74 Complications of Delivered, Delivered, Postpartum Unspecified
anaesthesia during labour with or Antepartum condition or as to episode
and delivery without with mention condition or complication of care, or not
             mention of of postpartum complication applicable
             antepartum complication 
             condition 
O74.0 Aspiration pneumonitis O74.001o O74.002o O74.003o O74.004o O74.009o
due to anaesthesia during labour 
and delivery 
O74.101o O74.102o O74.103o O74.104o O74.109o
O74.201o O74.202o O74.203o O74.204o O74.209o
O74.301o O74.302o O74.303o O74.304o O74.309o
O74.4 Toxic reaction to local O74.401o O74.402o O74.403o O74.404o O74.409o
anaesthesia during labour and 
delivery 
O74.5 Spinal and epidural O74.501o O74.502o O74.503o O74.504o O74.509o
anaesthesia-induced headache 
during labour and delivery 
O74.6 Other complications of O74.601o O74.602o O74.603o O74.604o O74.609o
spinal and epidural anaesthesia 
during labour and delivery 
O74.7 Failed or difficult O74.701o O74.702o O74.703o O74.704o O74.709o
intubation during labour and 
delivery 
O74.8 Other complications of O74.801o O74.802o O74.803o O74.804o O74.809o
anaesthesia during labour and 
delivery 
O74.9 Complication of O74.901o O74.902o O74.903o O74.904o O74.909o
anaesthesia during labour and 
delivery, unspecified 
Includes
• Inhalation of stomach contents or
secretions NOS due to anaesthesia during
labour and delivery
• Mendelson's syndrome due to anaesthesia
during labour and delivery
O74.1 Other pulmonary
complications of anaesthesia
during labour and delivery
Includes
• Pressure collapse of lung due to
anaesthesia during labour and delivery
O74.2 Cardiac complications of
anaesthesia during labour and
delivery
Includes
• Cardiac arrest due to anaesthesia during
labour and delivery
• Cardiac failure due to anaesthesia during
labour and delivery
O74.3 Central nervous system
complications of anaesthesia
during labour and delivery
Includes
• Cerebral anoxia due to anaesthesia during
labour and delivery
649
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O75
Other complications of labour and delivery, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
O75
puerperal:
•
infection (O86.-)
•
sepsis (O85)
O75 Other Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
complications of or without mention of condition or condition or to episode of
labour and delivery, mention of postpartum complication complication care, or not
not elsewhere antepartum complication applicable
classified condition 
O75.0 Maternal O75.001o O75.002o O75.003o O75.004o O75.009o
distress during labour 
and delivery 
O75.1 Shock during O75.101o O75.102o O75.103o O75.104o O75.109o
or following labour and 
delivery 
O75.2 Pyrexia during O75.201o --- O75.203o --- O75.209o
labour, not elsewhere 
classified 
O75.3 Other infection O75.301o --- O75.303o --- O75.309o
during labour 
O75.401o O75.402o O75.403o O75.404o O75.409o
O75.5 Delayed O75.501o --- O75.503o --- O75.509o
delivery after artificial 
rupture of membranes 
O75.6 Delayed O75.601o --- O75.603o --- O75.609o
delivery after 
spontaneous or 
unspecified rupture of 
membranes 
Includes
• Obstetric shock
Includes
• Sepsis during labour
O75.4 Other
complications of
obstetric surgery and
procedures
Includes
• Cardiac arrest following
cesarean or other obstetric
surgery or procedures,
including delivery NOS
• Cardiac failure following
cesarean or other obstetric
surgery or procedures,
including delivery NOS
• Cerebral anoxia following
cesarean or other obstetric
surgery or procedures,
including delivery NOS
• Conditions in N99.0,
N99.8, N99.9
Excludes
• complications of
anaesthesia during labour
and delivery (O74.-)
Includes
• Prolonged rupture of
membranes
Excludes
• spontaneous premature
rupture of membranes
(O42.-)
650
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O75 Other Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
complications of or without mention of condition or condition or to episode of
labour and delivery, mention of postpartum complication complication care, or not
not elsewhere antepartum complication applicable
classified condition 
O75.7 Vaginal O75.701o --- --- --- O75.709o
delivery following 
previous caesarean 
section 
O75.881o O75.882o O75.883o O75.884o O75.889o
O75.90 Complication O75.901o O75.902o O75.903o O75.904o O75.909o
of labour and delivery, 
unspecified 
Includes
• vaginal birth after
caesarean [VBAC]
Excludes
• Maternal care due to
uterine scar from previous
surgery (O34.20-)
O75.88 Other
specified
complications of
labour & delivery
Includes
• Maternal exhaustion
Complications predominantly related to the puerperium
(O85-O92)
Note:
Excludes:
O85
Categories O88.-, O91.- and O92.- include the listed conditions even if they occur during pregnancy and
childbirth.
mental and behavioural disorders associated with the puerperium (F53.-)
obstetrical tetanus (A34)
puerperal osteomalacia (M83.0)
Puerperal sepsis
Includes:
puerperal:
•
endometritis
•
fever
•
peritonitis
•
sepsis
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Excludes:
obstetric pyaemic and septic embolism (O88.3-)
sepsis during labour (O75.3-)
O85.002o Puerperal sepsis, delivered, with mention of postpartum complication
O85.004o Puerperal sepsis, postpartum condition or complication
O85.009o Puerperal sepsis, unspecified as to episode of care, or not applicable
651
O85.009o
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O 86
Other puerperal infections
Use additional code (B95-B97), if desired, to identify infectious agent
Excludes:
infection during labour (O75.3-)
O86
O86 Other puerperal infections Delivered, with Postpartum Unspecified as to
                               mention of condition or episode of care, or
                               postpartum complication not applicable
                               complication 
O86.0 Infection of obstetric surgical wound O86.002o O86.004o O86.009o
O86.1 Other infection of genital tract following O86.102o O86.104o O86.109o
delivery 
O86.202o O86.204o O86.209o
O86.302o O86.304o O86.309o
O86.402o O86.404o O86.409o
O86.802o O86.804o O86.809o
Includes
• Infected caesarean section wound following delivery
• Infected perineal repair following delivery
Includes
• Cervicitis following delivery
• Vaginitis following delivery
O86.2 Urinary tract infection following
delivery
Includes
• Conditions in N15.-, N30.-, N34.-, N39.0 following
delivery
• Conditions in N39.0 following delivery
• Conditions in N10-N12, N15.-, N30.-, N34.-, N39.0
following delivery
• Conditions in N34.-, N39.0 following delivery
• Conditions in, N30.-, N34.-, N39.0 following delivery
O86.3 Other genitourinary tract infections
following delivery
Includes
• Puerperal genitourinary tract infection NOS
O86.4 Pyrexia of unknown origin following
delivery
Includes
• Puerperal infection NOS
• Puerperal pyrexia NOS
Excludes
• puerperal fever (O85)
O86.8 Other specified puerperal infections
O87
Venous complications in the puerperium
Includes:
Excludes:
in labour, delivery and the puerperium
obstetric embolism (O88.-)
venous complications in pregnancy (O22.-)
O87 Venous complications in the Delivered, with Postpartum Unspecified as to
puerperium mention of condition or episode of care, or
           postpartum complication not applicable
           complication 
O87.0 Superficial thrombophlebitis in the O87.002o O87.004o O87.009o
puerperium 
O87.1 Deep phlebothrombosis in the O87.102o O87.104o O87.109o
puerperium 
O87.202o O87.204o O87.209o
Includes
• Deep-vein thrombosis, postpartum
• Pelvic thrombophlebitis, postpartum
O87.2 Haemorrhoids in the puerperium
652
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O87 Venous complications in the Delivered, with Postpartum Unspecified as to
puerperium mention of condition or episode of care, or
           postpartum complication not applicable
           complication 
O87.3 Cerebral venous thrombosis in the O87.302o O87.304o O87.309o
puerperium 
O87.802o O87.804o O87.809o
O87.9 Venous complication in the puerperium, O87.902o O87.904o O87.909o
unspecified 
Includes
• Cerebrovenous sinus thrombosis in the puerperium
O87.8 Other venous complications in the
puerperium
Includes
• Genital varices in the puerperium
Includes
• Puerperal phlebitis NOS
• Puerperal phlebopathy NOS
• Puerperal thrombosis NOS
O88
Obstetric embolism
Includes:
Excludes:
pulmonary emboli in pregnancy, childbirth or the puerperium
embolism complicating abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07 , O08.2)
O88 Obstetric Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
embolism or without mention of condition or condition or to episode of
         mention of postpartum complication complication care, or not
         antepartum complication applicable
         condition 
O88.0 Obstetric air O88.001o O88.002o O88.003o O88.004o O88.009o
embolism 
O88.1 Amniotic fluid O88.101o O88.102o O88.103o O88.104o O88.109o
embolism 
O88.201o O88.202o O88.203o O88.204o O88.209o
O88.301o O88.302o O88.303o O88.304o O88.309o
O88.8 Other obstetric O88.801o O88.802o O88.803o O88.804o O88.809o
embolism 
Includes
• Anaphylactoid syndrome
of pregnancy
O88.2 Obstetric
blood-clot embolism
Includes
• Obstetric (pulmonary)
embolism NOS
• Puerperal (pulmonary)
embolism NOS
O88.3 Obstetric
pyaemic and septic
embolism
Includes
• Obstetric fat embolism
653
O88
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O89
Complications of anaesthesia during the puerperium
Includes:
O89
maternal complications arising from the administration of a general or local anaesthetic,
analgesic or other sedation during the puerperium
O89 Complications of anaesthesia
during the puerperium
Delivered, with
mention of
postpartum
complication
Postpartum Unspecified as to
condition or episode of care, or
complication not delivered
O89.004o O89.009o
O89.102o O89.104o O89.109o
O89.2 Central nervous system complications of O89.202o O89.204o O89.209o
anaesthesia during the puerperium 
O89.302o O89.304o O89.309o
O89.4 Spinal and epidural anaesthesia-induced O89.402o O89.404o O89.409o
headache during the puerperium 
O89.5 Other complications of spinal and O89.502o O89.504o O89.509o
epidural anaesthesia during the puerperium 
O89.6 Failed or difficult intubation during the O89.602o O89.604o O89.609o
puerperium 
O89.8 Other complications of anaesthesia O89.802o O89.804o O89.809o
during the puerperium 
O89.9 Complication of anaesthesia during the O89.902o O89.904o O89.909o
puerperium, unspecified 
O89.0 Pulmonary complications of anaesthesia O89.002o
during the puerperium
Includes
• Aspiration pneumonitis due to anaesthesia during the
puerperium
• Inhalation of stomach contents or secretions NOS due to
anaesthesia during the puerperium
• Mendelson's syndrome due to anaesthesia during the
puerperium
• Pressure collapse of lung due to anaesthesia during the
puerperium
O89.1 Cardiac complications of anaesthesia
during the puerperium
Includes
• Cardiac arrest due to anaesthesia during the puerperium
• Cardiac failure due to anaesthesia during the puerperium
Includes
• Cerebral anoxia due to anaesthesia during the puerperium
O89.3 Toxic reaction to local anaesthesia
during the puerperium
O90
Complications of the puerperium, not elsewhere classified
O90 Complications of the puerperium, Delivered, with Postpartum Unspecified as to
not elsewhere classified mention of condition or episode of care, or
                         postpartum complication not applicable
                         complication 
O90.0 Disruption of caesarean section wound O90.002o O90.004o O90.009o
O90.1 Disruption of perineal obstetric wound O90.102o O90.104o O90.109o
O90.202o O90.204o O90.209o
Includes
• Disruption of wound of episiotomy
• Disruption of wound of perineal laceration
• Secondary perineal tear
O90.2 Haematoma of obstetric wound
Includes
• Haemorrhage of obstetric wound
654
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O90 Complications of the puerperium, Delivered, with Postpartum Unspecified as to
not elsewhere classified mention of condition or episode of care, or
                         postpartum complication not applicable
                         complication 
O90.3 Cardiomyopathy in the puerperium O90.302o O90.304o O90.309o
O90.402o O90.404o O90.409o
O90.502o O90.504o O90.509o
O90.8 Other complications of the puerperium, O90.802o O90.804o O90.809o
not elsewhere classified 
O90.904o O90.909o
Includes
• Conditions in I42.-
O90.4 Postpartum acute renal failure
Includes
• Hepatorenal syndrome following labour and delivery
O90.5 Postpartum thyroiditis
Includes
• Placental polyp
O90.9 Complication of the puerperium,
unspecified
O91
O90.902o
Infections of breast associated with childbirth
Includes:
the listed conditions during pregnancy, the puerperium or lactation
O91 Infections of Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
breast associated or without mention of condition or condition or to episode of
with childbirth mention of postpartum complication complication care, or not
                antepartum complication applicable
                condition 
O91.0 Infection of O91.001o O91.002o O91.003o O91.004o O91.009o
nipple associated with 
childbirth 
O91.101o O91.102o O91.103o O91.104o O91.109o
O91.201o O91.202o O91.203o O91.204o O91.209o
Includes
• Abscess of nipple
gestational
• Abscess of nipple puerperal
O91.1 Abscess of
breast associated with
childbirth
Includes
• Mammary abscess
gestational or puerperal
• Purulent mastitis
gestational or puerperal
• Subareolar abscess
gestational or puerperal
O91.2 Nonpurulent
mastitis associated
with childbirth
Includes
• Lymphangitis of breast
gestational or puerperal
• Mastitis interstitial
gestational or puerperal
• Mastitis NOS gestational or
puerperal
• Mastitis parenchymatous
gestational or puerperal
655
O91
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O92
Other disorders of breast and lactation associated with childbirth
Includes:
O92
the listed conditions during pregnancy, the puerperium or lactation
O92 Other Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
disorders of breast or without mention of condition or condition or to episode of
and lactation mention of postpartum complication complication care, or not
associated with antepartum complication applicable
childbirth condition 
O92.0 Retracted O92.001o O92.002o O92.003o O92.004o O92.009o
nipple associated with 
childbirth 
O92.1 Cracked nipple O92.101o O92.102o O92.103o O92.104o O92.109o
associated with 
childbirth 
Includes
• Fissure of nipple,
gestational or puerperal
O92.2 Other and O92.201o O92.202o O92.203o O92.204o O92.209o
unspecified disorders 
of breast associated 
with childbirth 
O92.3 Agalactia O92.301o O92.302o O92.303o O92.304o O92.309o
O92.4 Hypogalactia O92.401o O92.402o O92.403o O92.404o O92.409o
O92.5 Suppressed O92.501o O92.502o O92.503o O92.504o O92.509o
lactation 
O92.601o O92.602o O92.603o O92.604o O92.609o
O92.701o O92.702o O92.703o O92.704o O92.709o
Includes
• Primary agalactia
Includes
• Agalactia elective
• Agalactia secondary
• Agalactia therapeutic
O92.6 Galactorrhoea
Excludes
• galactorrhoea not
associated with childbirth
(N64.3)
O92.7 Other and
unspecified disorders
of lactation
Includes
• Puerperal galactocele
656
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
Other obstetric conditions, not elsewhere classified
(O94-O99)
Note:
O94
For use of categories O95-O97 reference should be made to the mortality coding rules and guidelines.
Sequelae of complication of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium
Note:
Excludes:
O95
O97.9
Category O94 is to be used for morbidity coding only to indicate previous episodes of conditions
in categories (O00-O75 and O85-O92) as the cause of sequelae, which are themselves classified
elsewhere. The 'sequelae' include conditions specified as such or as late effects, or those present
one year or more after the onset of the causal condition.
Not to be used for chronic complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium. Code
these to O00-O75 and O85-O92.
that resulting in death (O96,O97)
Obstetric death of unspecified cause
Includes:
Maternal death from unspecified cause occurring during pregnancy, labour and delivery, or the
puerperium
O95.001o Obstetric death of unspecified cause, delivered, with or without mention of antepartum
        condition
O95.002o Obstetric death of unspecified cause, delivered, with mention of postpartum complication
O95.003o Obstetric death of unspecified cause, antepartum condition or complication
O95.004o Obstetric death of unspecified cause, postpartum condition or complication
O95.009o Obstetric death of unspecified cause, unspecified as to episode of care, or not applicable
O96
Death from any obstetric cause occurring more than 42 days but less than
one year after delivery
Use additional code to identify obstetric cause (direct or indirect) of death.
O96.0 Death from direct obstetric cause
O96.1 Death from indirect obstetric cause
O96.9 Death from unspecified obstetric cause
O97
Death from sequelae of obstetric causes
Includes:
Death from any obstetric cause (direct or indirect) occurring one year or more after delivery
Use additional code to identify the obstetric cause (direct or indirect)
O97.0 Death from sequelae of direct obstetric cause
O97.1 Death from sequelae of indirect obstetric cause
O97.9 Death from sequelae of obstetric cause, unspecified
657
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O98
O98
Maternal infectious and parasitic diseases classifiable elsewhere but
complicating pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium
Includes:
the listed conditions when complicating the pregnant state, when aggravated by the pregnancy,
or as a reason for obstetric care
Use additional code (Chapter I) to identify specific condition.
Excludes:
asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection status (Z21)
laboratory evidence of human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] (R75)
obstetrical tetanus (A34)
puerperal:
•
infection (O86.-)
•
sepsis (O85)
when the reason for maternal care is that the disease is known or suspected to have affected the
fetus (O35-O36)
O98 Maternal Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
infectious and or without mention of condition or condition or to episode of
parasitic diseases mention of postpartum complication complication care, or not
classifiable antepartum complication applicable
elsewhere but condition 
complicating 
pregnancy, 
childbirth and the 
puerperium 
O98.0 Tuberculosis O98.001o O98.002o O98.003o O98.004o O98.009o
complicating 
pregnancy, childbirth 
and the puerperium 
O98.101o O98.102o O98.103o O98.104o O98.109o
O98.201o O98.202o O98.203o O98.204o O98.209o
O98.301o O98.302o O98.303o O98.304o O98.309o
O98.4 Viral hepatitis O98.401o O98.402o O98.403o O98.404o O98.409o
complicating 
pregnancy, childbirth 
and the puerperium 
Includes
• Conditions in A15-A19
O98.1 Syphilis
complicating
pregnancy, childbirth
and the puerperium
Includes
• Conditions in A50-A53
O98.2 Gonorrhoea
complicating
pregnancy, childbirth
and the puerperium
Includes
• Conditions in A54.-
O98.3 Other
infections with a
predominantly sexual
mode of transmission
complicating
pregnancy, childbirth
and the puerperium
Includes
• Conditions in A55-A64
Includes
• Conditions in B15-B19
658
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O98 Maternal Delivered, with Delivered, with Antepartum Postpartum Unspecified as
infectious and or without mention of condition or condition or to episode of
parasitic diseases mention of postpartum complication complication care, or not
classifiable antepartum complication applicable
elsewhere but condition 
complicating 
pregnancy, 
childbirth and the 
puerperium 
O98.5 Other viral O98.501o O98.502o O98.503o O98.504o O98.509o
diseases complicating 
pregnancy, childbirth 
and the puerperium 
O98.601o O98.602o O98.603o O98.604o O98.609o
O98.701o O98.702o O98.703o O98.704o O98.709o
O98.8 Other maternal O98.801o O98.802o O98.803o O98.804o O98.809o
infectious and parasitic 
diseases complicating 
pregnancy, childbirth 
and the puerperium 
O98.9 Unspecified O98.902o O98.903o O98.904o O98.909o
maternal infectious or 
parasitic disease 
complicating 
pregnancy, childbirth 
and the puerperium 
Includes
• Conditions in A08, A80-
B09,B25-B34
O98.6 Protozoal
diseases complicating
pregnancy, childbirth
and the puerperium
Includes
• Conditions in B50-B64
O98.7 Human
immunodeficiency
[HIV] disease
complicating
pregnancy, childbirth
and the puerperium
Includes
• Acquired immune
deficiency syndrome
(AIDS)
Code Also
• Use additional code(s) to
identify all manifestations
of HIV disease.
Excludes
• Asymptomatic HIV status
(Z21)
• HIV positive NOS (Z21)
• Nonconclusive serologic
evidence of HIV (R75)
O98.901o
659
O98
O99
Other maternal diseases classifiable elsewhere but complicating pregnancy,
childbirth and the puerperium
Note:
This category includes conditions which complicate the pregnant state, are aggravated by the
pregnancy or are a main reason for obstetric care and for which the Alphabetical Index does not
indicate a specific rubric in Chapter XV.
Use additional code to identify specific condition.
Excludes:
infectious and parasitic diseases (O98.-)
injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98)
when the reason for maternal care is that the condition is known or suspected to have affected
the fetus (O35-O36)
O99 Other maternal diseases Delivered, Delivered, Unspecified
classifiable elsewhere but with or Antepartum as to episode
complicating pregnancy, without Postpartum of care, or not
childbirth and the puerperium mention of with mention condition or condition or applicable
                              antepartum of 
                              condition complication complication 
                                        postpartum 
                                        complication 
O99.0 Anaemia complicating O99.001o O99.002o O99.003o O99.004o O99.009o
pregnancy, childbirth and the 
puerperium 
O99.1 Other diseases of the blood and O99.101o O99.102o O99.103o O99.104o O99.109o
blood-forming organs and certain 
disorders involving the immune 
mechanism complicating 
pregnancy, childbirth and the 
puerperium 
O99.201o O99.202o O99.203o O99.204o O99.209o
O99.301o O99.302o O99.303o O99.304o O99.309o
Includes
• Conditions in D50-D64
Includes
• Conditions in D65-D89
Excludes
• haemorrhage with coagulation defects (O46.00,
O67.0-, O72.3-)
O99.2 Endocrine, nutritional and
metabolic diseases complicating
pregnancy, childbirth and the
puerperium
Includes
• Conditions in E00-E07, E15-E34, and E50-E89
Excludes
• diabetes mellitus (O24.-)
• malnutrition (O25.-)
• postpartum thyroiditis (O90.5-)
O99.3 Mental disorders and diseases
of the nervous system complicating
pregnancy, childbirth and the
puerperium
Includes
• Conditions in F00-F52, F54-F99 and G00-G99
Excludes
• postnatal depression (F53.0)
• pregnancy-related peripheral neuritis (O26.8-)
• puerperal psychosis (F53.1)
PREGNANCY, CHILDBIRTH AND THE PUERPERIUM (O00-O99)
O99 Other maternal diseases Delivered, Delivered, Unspecified
classifiable elsewhere but with or Antepartum as to episode
complicating pregnancy, without Postpartum of care, or not
childbirth and the puerperium mention of with mention condition or condition or applicable
                              antepartum of 
                              condition complication complication 
                                        postpartum 
                                        complication 
O99.4 Diseases of the circulatory O99.401o O99.402o O99.403o O99.404o O99.409o
system complicating pregnancy, 
childbirth and the puerperium 
O99.501o O99.502o O99.503o O99.504o O99.509o
O99.601o O99.602o O99.603o O99.604o O99.609o
O99.701o O99.702o O99.703o O99.704o O99.709o
O99.801o O99.802o O99.803o O99.804o O99.809o
Includes
• Conditions in I00-I09, I20-I99
Excludes
• cardiomyopathy in the puerperium (O90.3-)
• hypertensive disorders
(O10-O16)
• obstetric embolism (O88.-)
•
•
venous complications and
cerebrovenous sinus thrombosis
in:
•
labour, childbirth and the
puerperium (O87.-)
•
pregnancy (O22.-)
O99.5 Diseases of the respiratory
system complicating pregnancy,
childbirth and the puerperium
Includes
• Conditions in J00-J99
O99.6 Diseases of the digestive
system complicating pregnancy,
childbirth and the puerperium
Includes
• Conditions in K00-K66, K80-K93
Excludes
• liver disorders in pregnancy, childbirth and the
puerperium (O26.6)
O99.7 Diseases of the skin and
subcutaneous tissue complicating
pregnancy, childbirth and the
puerperium
Includes
• Conditions in L00-L99
Excludes
• herpes gestationis (O26.4)
O99.8 Other specified diseases and
conditions complicating pregnancy,
childbirth and the puerperium
Includes
• Combination of conditions classifiable to O99.0-
O99.7
• Conditions in B90-B94, C00-D48, H00-H95,
M00-M82, M83.2-M99, N14-N15.0, N15.8-
N15.9, N20-N39, N60-N64, N80-N90, R73.0,
Q00-Q99 NEC
Excludes
• genitourinary infections in pregnancy (O23.-)
• infection of genitourinary tract following
delivery (O86.0-O86.3-)
• maternal care for known or suspected
abnormality of maternal pelvic organs (O34.-)
• postpartum acute renal failure (O90.4-)
• postpartum nephritis (O90.8-)
661
O99
I
CHAPTER XVI
Certain conditions originating in the perinatal period
(P00-P96)
Includes:
Excludes:
conditions that have their origin in the perinatal period even though death or morbidity occurs later
congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (Q00-Q99)
endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (E00-E90)
injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98)
neoplasms (C00-D48)
tetanus neonatorum (A33)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
P00-P04
P05-P08
P10-P15
P20-P29
P35-P39
P50-P61
P70-P74
P75-P78
P80-P83
P90-P96
Fetus and newborn affected by maternal factors and by complications of pregnancy, labour and
delivery
Disorders related to length of gestation and fetal growth
Birth trauma
Respiratory and cardiovascular disorders specific to the perinatal period
Infections specific to the perinatal period
Haemorrhagic and haematological disorders of fetus and newborn
Transitory endocrine and metabolic disorders specific to fetus and newborn
Digestive system disorders of fetus and newborn
Conditions involving the integument and temperature regulation of fetus and newborn
Other disorders originating in the perinatal period
Asterisk category for this chapter is provided as follows:
P75*
Meconium ileus (E84.1†)
663
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
P00
Fetus and newborn affected by maternal factors and by
complications of pregnancy, labour and delivery
(P00-P04)
Includes:
P00
the listed maternal conditions only when specified as a cause of mortality or morbidity in fetus or newborn
Fetus and newborn affected by maternal conditions that may be unrelated to
present pregnancy
Excludes:
fetus and newborn affected by:
•
maternal:
•
complications of pregnancy (P01.-)
•
endocrine and metabolic disorders (P70-P74)
•
noxious influences transmitted via placenta or breast milk (P04.-)
P00.0 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal hypertensive disorders
     Includes:
    Fetus or newborn affected by maternal conditions classifiable to (O10-O11),(O13-O16)
P00.1 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal renal and urinary tract diseases
     Includes:
    Fetus or newborn affected by maternal conditions classifiable to (N00-N39)
P00.2 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal infectious and parasitic diseases
     Includes:
    Fetus or newborn affected by maternal infectious disease classifiable to (A00-B99) and (J09-
   J11) but not itself manifesting that disease
  Excludes:
 infections specific to the perinatal period (P35-P39)
maternal genital tract and other localized infections (P00.8)
P00.3 Fetus and newborn affected by other maternal circulatory and respiratory diseases
     Includes:
    Fetus or newborn affected by maternal conditions classifiable to (I00-I99) (J00-J99)(Q20-Q34)
   and not included in (P00.0P00.2)
P00.4 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal nutritional disorders
     Includes:
    Fetus or newborn affected by maternal disorders classifiable to (E40-E64)
   Maternal malnutrition NOS
P00.5 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal injury
     Includes:
    Fetus or newborn affected by maternal conditions classifiable to (S00-T79)
P00.6 Fetus and newborn affected by surgical procedure on mother
     Excludes:
    caesarean section for present delivery (P03.4)
   damage to placenta from amniocentesis, caesarean section or surgical induction (P02.1)
  previous surgery to uterus or pelvic organs (P03.8)
 termination of pregnancy, fetus (P96.4)
P00.7 Fetus and newborn affected by other medical procedures on mother, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Fetus or newborn affected by radiology on mother
   Excludes:
  damage to placenta from amniocentesis, caesarean section or surgical induction (P02.1)
 fetus or newborn affected by other complications of labour and delivery (P03.-)
P00.8 Fetus and newborn affected by other maternal conditions
     Includes:
    Fetus or newborn affected by:
   •
    conditions classifiable to (T80-T88)
   •
    maternal:
   •
    genital tract and other localized infections
   •
    systemic lupus erythematosus
   Excludes:
  transitory neonatal endocrine and metabolic disorders (P70-P74)
P00.9 Fetus and newborn affected by unspecified maternal condition
P01
Fetus and newborn affected by maternal complications of pregnancy
P01.0 Fetus and newborn affected by incompetent cervix
P01.1 Fetus and newborn affected by premature rupture of membranes
664
CERTAIN CONDITIONS ORIGINATING IN THE PERINATAL PERIOD (P00-P96)
P01.2 Fetus and newborn affected by oligohydramnios
     Excludes:
    when due to premature rupture of membranes (P01.1)
P01.3 Fetus and newborn affected by polyhydramnios
     Includes:
    Hydramnios
P01.4 Fetus and newborn affected by ectopic pregnancy
     Includes:
    Abdominal pregnancy
P01.5 Fetus and newborn affected by multiple pregnancy
     Includes:
    Triplet (pregnancy)
   Twin (pregnancy)
P01.6 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal death
P01.7 Fetus and newborn affected by malpresentation before labour
     Includes:
    Breech presentation
   External version
  Face presentation
 before labour
Transverse lie
Unstable lie
P01.8 Fetus and newborn affected by other maternal complications of pregnancy
     Includes:
    Spontaneous abortion, fetus
P01.9 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal complication of pregnancy, unspecified
P02
P02.6
Fetus and newborn affected by complications of placenta, cord and
membranes
P02.0 Fetus and newborn affected by placenta praevia
P02.1 Fetus and newborn affected by other forms of placental separation and haemorrhage
     Includes:
    Abruptio placentae
   Accidental haemorrhage
  Antepartum haemorrhage
 Damage to placenta from amniocentesis, caesarean section or surgical induction
Maternal blood loss
Premature separation of placenta
P02.2 Fetus and newborn affected by other and unspecified morphological and functional
     abnormalities of placenta
    Includes:
   Placental:
  •
   dysfunction
  •
   infarction
  •
   insufficiency
P02.3 Fetus and newborn affected by placental transfusion syndromes
     Includes:
    Placental and cord abnormalities resulting in twin-to-twin or other transplacental transfusion
   Use additional code to indicate resultant condition in the fetus or newborn.
P02.4 Fetus and newborn affected by prolapsed cord
P02.5 Fetus and newborn affected by other compression of umbilical cord
     Includes:
    Cord (tightly) around neck
   Entanglement of cord
  Knot in cord
P02.6 Fetus and newborn affected by other and unspecified conditions of umbilical cord
     Includes:
    Short cord
   Vasa praevia
  Excludes:
 single umbilical artery (Q27.0)
665
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
P02.7 Fetus and newborn affected by chorioamnionitis
     Includes:
    Amnionitis
   Funisitis
  Membranitis
 Placentitis
P02.8 Fetus and newborn affected by other abnormalities of membranes
     Includes:
    Amniotic band syndrome
P02.9 Fetus and newborn affected by abnormality of membranes, unspecified
P02.7
P03
Fetus and newborn affected by other complications of labour and delivery
P03.0 Fetus and newborn affected by breech delivery and extraction
P03.1 Fetus and newborn affected by other malpresentation, malposition and disproportion during
     labour and delivery
    Includes:
   Contracted pelvis
  Fetus or newborn affected by conditions classifiable to O64-O66
 Persistent occipitoposterior
Transverse lie
P03.2 Fetus and newborn affected by forceps delivery
P03.3 Fetus and newborn affected by delivery by vacuum extractor [ventouse]
P03.4 Fetus and newborn affected by caesarean delivery
P03.5 Fetus and newborn affected by precipitate delivery
     Includes:
    Rapid second stage
P03.6 Fetus and newborn affected by abnormal uterine contractions
     Includes:
    Fetus or newborn affected by conditions classifiable to O62.-, except O62.3
   Hypertonic labour
  Uterine inertia
P03.8 Fetus and newborn affected by other specified complications of labour and delivery
     Includes:
    Abnormality of maternal soft tissues
   Destructive operation to facilitate delivery
  Fetus or newborn affected by conditions classifiable to O60-75 and by procedures used in labour
 and delivery not included in P02.-P02.- and P03.0-P03.6
Induction of labour
P03.9 Fetus and newborn affected by complication of labour and delivery, unspecified
P04
Fetus and newborn affected by noxious influences transmitted via placenta
or breast milk
Includes:
Excludes:
nonteratogenic effects of substances transmitted via placenta
congenital malformations (Q00-Q99)
neonatal jaundice due to drugs or toxins transmitted from mother (P58.4)
P04.0 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal anaesthesia and analgesia in pregnancy, labour and
     delivery
    Includes:
   Reactions and intoxications from maternal opiates and tranquillizers administered during labour
  and delivery
P04.1 Fetus and newborn affected by other maternal medication
     Includes:
    Cancer chemotherapy
   Cytotoxic drugs
  Excludes:
 dysmorphism due to warfarin (Q86.2)
fetal hydantoin syndrome (Q86.1)
maternal use of drugs of addiction (P04.4)
P04.2 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal use of tobacco
666
CERTAIN CONDITIONS ORIGINATING IN THE PERINATAL PERIOD (P00-P96)
P04.3 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal use of alcohol
     Excludes:
    fetal alcohol syndrome (Q86.0)
P04.4 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal use of drugs of addiction
     Excludes:
    maternal anaesthesia and analgesia (P04.0)
   withdrawal symptoms from maternal use of drugs of addiction (P96.1)
P04.5 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal use of nutritional chemical substances
P04.6 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal exposure to environmental chemical substances
P04.8 Fetus and newborn affected by other maternal noxious influences
P04.9 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal noxious influence, unspecified
P04.9
667
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
P05
Disorders related to length of gestation and fetal growth
(P05-P08)
P05
Slow fetal growth and fetal malnutrition
P05.2 Fetal malnutrition without mention of light or small for gestational age
     Includes:
    Infant, not light or small for gestational age, showing signs of fetal malnutrition, such as dry,
   peeling skin and loss of subcutaneous tissue.
  Excludes:
 fetal malnutrition with mention of:
•
 light for gestational age (P05.9-)
•
 small for gestational age (P05.9-)
P05.9 Slow fetal growth, unspecified
     Includes:
    Fetal growth restriction NOS
   Intrauterine fetal growth restriction [IUGR]
  Light for dates
 Light for gestational age (usually referred to as weight below but length above 10th centile for
gestational age)
Small and light for dates
Small for dates
Small for gestational age (usually referred to as weight and length below 10th centile for
gestational age)
P05.90o Symmetric intrauterine growth restriction [IUGR]
P05.91o Asymmetric intrauterine growth restriction [IUGR]
P05.99o Unspecified intrauterine growth restriction [IUGR]
P07
Disorders related to short gestation and low birth weight, not elsewhere
classified
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
When both birth weight and gestational age are available, priority of assignment should be given
to birth weight.
the listed conditions, without further specification, as the cause of mortality, morbidity or
additional care, in newborn
low birth weight due to slow fetal growth and fetal malnutrition (P05.-)
P07.0 Extremely low birth weight
     Includes:
    Birth weight 999 g or less.
P07.1 Other low birth weight
     Includes:
    Birth weight 1000-2499 g.
P07.2 Extreme immaturity
     Includes:
    Less than 28 completed weeks (less than 196 completed days) of gestation.
   Use additional code to identify extremely low birth weight (P07.0) or other low birth weight (P07.1) where
  applicable.
P07.3 Other preterm infants
     Includes:
    28 completed weeks or more but less than 37 completed weeks (196 completed days but less than
   259 completed days) of gestation.
  Prematurity NOS
668
CERTAIN CONDITIONS ORIGINATING IN THE PERINATAL PERIOD (P00-P96)
P08
Disorders related to long gestation and high birth weight
Note:
Includes:
When both birth weight and gestational age are available, priority of assignment should be given
to birth weight.
the listed conditions, without further specification, as causes of mortality, morbidity or
additional care, in fetus or newborn
P08.0 Exceptionally large baby
     Includes:
    Macrosomic baby
   Usually implies a birth weight of 4500 g or more.
  Excludes:
 syndrome of infant of:
•
 diabetic mother (P70.1)
•
 mother with gestational diabetes (P70.0)
P08.1 Other heavy for gestational age infants
     Includes:
    Other fetus or infant heavy- or large-for-dates regardless of period of gestation.
   Usually implies a birth weight>90th percentile for gestational age or 4000g or more at term
  Excludes:
 Birth weight of 4500g or more (P08.0)
syndrome of infant of:
•
 diabetic mother (P70.1)
•
 mother with gestational diabetes (P70.1)
P08.2 
P08.2
Post-term infant, not heavy for gestational age
Includes:
Fetus or infant with gestation period of 41 completed weeks or more (287 days or more), not
heavy- or large-for-dates.
Post-term infant NOS
Postmaturity NOS
669
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
P10
Birth trauma
(P10-P15)
P10
Intracranial laceration and haemorrhage due to birth injury
Excludes:
intracranial haemorrhage of fetus or newborn:
•
NOS (P52.9)
•
due to anoxia or hypoxia (P52.-)
P10.0 Subdural haemorrhage due to birth injury
     Includes:
    Subdural haematoma (localized) due to birth injury
   Excludes:
  subdural haemorrhage accompanying tentorial tear (P10.4)
P10.1 Cerebral haemorrhage due to birth injury
P10.2 Intraventricular haemorrhage due to birth injury
P10.3 Subarachnoid haemorrhage due to birth injury
P10.4 Tentorial tear due to birth injury
P10.8 Other intracranial lacerations and haemorrhages due to birth injury
P10.9 Unspecified intracranial laceration and haemorrhage due to birth injury
P11
Other birth injuries to central nervous system
P11.0 Cerebral oedema due to birth injury
P11.1 Other specified brain damage due to birth injury
P11.2 Unspecified brain damage due to birth injury
P11.3 Birth injury to facial nerve
     Includes:
    Facial palsy due to birth injury
P11.4 Birth injury to other cranial nerves
P11.5 Birth injury to spine and spinal cord
     Includes:
    Fracture of spine due to birth injury
P11.9 Birth injury to central nervous system, unspecified
P12
Birth injury to scalp
P12.0 Cephalhaematoma due to birth injury
P12.1 Chignon due to birth injury
P12.2 Epicranial subaponeurotic haemorrhage due to birth injury
P12.3 Bruising of scalp due to birth injury
P12.4 Monitoring injury of scalp of newborn
     Includes:
    Sampling incision
   Scalp clip (electrode) injury
P12.8 Other birth injuries to scalp
     Includes:
    Caput succedaneum
P12.9 Birth injury to scalp, unspecified
P13
Birth injury to skeleton
Excludes:
birth injury to spine (P11.5)
P13.0 Fracture of skull due to birth injury
P13.00o Linear skull fracture due to birth injury
P13.01o Depressed skull fracture due to birth injury
P13.08o Other/multiple skull fracture due to birth injury
670
CERTAIN CONDITIONS ORIGINATING IN THE PERINATAL PERIOD (P00-P96)
P13.09o Unspecified skull fracture due to birth injury
P13.1 Other birth injuries to skull
     Excludes:
    cephalhaematoma (P12.0)
P13.2 Birth injury to femur
P13.3 Birth injury to other long bones
P13.30o Birth injury to humerus
P13.38o Birth injury to other long bones
P13.4 Fracture of clavicle due to birth injury
P13.8 Birth injuries to other parts of skeleton
P13.9 Birth injury to skeleton, unspecified
P14
P15.9
Birth injury to peripheral nervous system
P14.0 Erb's paralysis due to birth injury
P14.1 Klumpke's paralysis due to birth injury
P14.2 Phrenic nerve paralysis due to birth injury
P14.3 Other brachial plexus birth injuries
P14.8 Birth injuries to other parts of peripheral nervous system
P14.9 Birth injury to peripheral nervous system, unspecified
P15
Other birth injuries
P15.0 Birth injury to liver
     Includes:
    Rupture of liver due to birth injury
P15.1 Birth injury to spleen
     Includes:
    Rupture of spleen due to birth injury
P15.2 Sternomastoid injury due to birth injury
P15.3 Birth injury to eye
     Includes:
    Subconjunctival haemorrhage
   Traumatic glaucoma
P15.4 Birth injury to face
     Includes:
    Facial congestion due to birth injury
P15.5 Birth injury to external genitalia
P15.6 Subcutaneous fat necrosis due to birth injury
P15.8 Other specified birth injuries
P15.9 
due to birth injury
Birth injury, unspecified
671
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
P20
Respiratory and cardiovascular disorders specific to the
perinatal period
(P20-P29)
P20
Fetal asphyxia
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
With documented umbilical cord arterial value of PH <=7.0
fetal or intrauterine:
•
acidosis
•
anoxia
•
asphyxia
•
hypoxia
intracranial haemorrhage due to anoxia or hypoxia (P52.-)
P20.0 Antepartum fetal asphyxia first noted before onset of labour
P20.1 Intrapartum fetal asphyxia first noted during labour and delivery
P20.9 Fetal asphyxia, unspecified when first noted
P21
Birth asphyxia
Note:
Excludes:
P21.9
P22
This category is not to be used for low Apgar score without mention of asphyxia or other
respiratory problems.
intrauterine hypoxia or asphyxia (P20.-)
Newborn asphyxia, unspecified
Includes:
Anoxia NOS
Asphyxia NOS
Hypoxia NOS
Respiratory distress of newborn
Excludes:
respiratory failure of newborn (P28.5)
P22.0 Respiratory distress syndrome of newborn (RDS)
     Includes:
    Hyaline membrane disease
   Idiopathic respiratory distress syndrome (IRDS)
P22.1 Transient tachypnoea of newborn
     Includes:
    Wet lung syndrome
P22.8 Other respiratory distress of newborn
P22.9 Respiratory distress of newborn, unspecified
P23
Congenital pneumonia
Includes:
Excludes:
infective pneumonia acquired in utero or during birth
neonatal pneumonia resulting from aspiration (P24.-)
P23.0 Congenital pneumonia due to viral agent
     Excludes:
    congenital rubella pneumonitis (P35.0)
P23.1 Congenital pneumonia due to Chlamydia
P23.2 Congenital pneumonia due to staphylococcus
P23.3 Congenital pneumonia due to streptococcus, group B
P23.4 Congenital pneumonia due to Escherichia coli
P23.5 Congenital pneumonia due to Pseudomonas
P23.6 Congenital pneumonia due to other bacterial agents
     Includes:
    Haemophilus influenzae
   Klebsiella pneumoniae
  Mycoplasma
 Streptococcus, except group B
672
CERTAIN CONDITIONS ORIGINATING IN THE PERINATAL PERIOD (P00-P96)
P23.8 Congenital pneumonia due to other organisms
P23.9 Congenital pneumonia, unspecified
P24
P28.1
Neonatal aspiration syndromes
Includes:
neonatal pneumonia resulting from aspiration
P24.0 Neonatal aspiration of meconium
P24.1 Neonatal aspiration of amniotic fluid and mucus
     Includes:
    Aspiration of liquor (amnii)
P24.2 Neonatal aspiration of blood
P24.3 Neonatal aspiration of milk and regurgitated food
P24.8 Other neonatal aspiration syndromes
P24.9 Neonatal aspiration syndrome, unspecified
     Includes:
    Neonatal aspiration pneumonia NOS
P25
Interstitial emphysema and related conditions originating in the perinatal
period
P25.0 Interstitial emphysema originating in the perinatal period
P25.1 Pneumothorax originating in the perinatal period
P25.2 Pneumomediastinum originating in the perinatal period
P25.3 Pneumopericardium originating in the perinatal period
P25.8 Other conditions related to interstitial emphysema originating in the perinatal period
     Includes:
    Air embolism originating in the perinatal period
P26
Pulmonary haemorrhage originating in the perinatal period
P26.0 Tracheobronchial haemorrhage originating in the perinatal period
P26.8 Other pulmonary haemorrhages originating in the perinatal period
P27
Chronic respiratory disease originating in the perinatal period
P27.0 Wilson-Mikity syndrome
     Includes:
    Pulmonary dysmaturity
P27.1 Bronchopulmonary dysplasia originating in the perinatal period
P27.8 Other chronic respiratory diseases originating in the perinatal period
     Includes:
    Congenital pulmonary fibrosis
   Ventilator lung in newborn
P27.9 Unspecified chronic respiratory disease originating in the perinatal period
P28
Other respiratory conditions originating in the perinatal period
Excludes:
congenital malformations of the respiratory system (Q30-Q34)
P28.0 Primary atelectasis of newborn
     Includes:
    Primary failure to expand terminal respiratory units
   Pulmonary:
  •
   hypoplasia associated with short gestation
  •
   immaturity NOS
P28.1 Other and unspecified atelectasis of newborn
     Includes:
    Atelectasis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    partial
   •
    secondary
   Resorption atelectasis without respiratory distress syndrome
673
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
P28.2 
P28.2
Cyanotic attacks of newborn
Excludes:
apnoea of newborn (P28.3-P28.4)
P28.3 Primary sleep apnoea of newborn
     Includes:
    Sleep apnoea of newborn NOS
P28.4 Other apnoea of newborn
P28.5 Respiratory failure of newborn
P28.8 Other specified respiratory conditions of newborn
     Includes:
    Congenital (laryngeal) stridor NOS
   Snuffles in newborn
  Excludes:
 early congenital syphilitic rhinitis (A50.0)
P28.9 Respiratory condition of newborn, unspecified
P29
Cardiovascular disorders originating in the perinatal period
Excludes:
congenital malformations of the circulatory system (Q20-Q28)
P29.0 Neonatal cardiac failure
P29.1 Neonatal cardiac dysrhythmia
P29.10o Neonatal cardiac arrest
P29.18o Other neonatal cardiac dysrhythmia
       Includes:
      Abnormal neonatal heart rate and rhythm
P29.2 Neonatal hypertension
P29.3 Persistent fetal circulation
     Includes:
    (Persistent) Pulmonary hypertension of newborn
   Delayed closure of ductus arteriosus
P29.4 Transient myocardial ischaemia of newborn
P29.8 Other cardiovascular disorders originating in the perinatal period
     Includes:
    Arterial thrombosis
   Cardiac thrombosis
  originating in perinatal period
 Venous thrombosis
P29.9 Cardiovascular disorder originating in the perinatal period, unspecified
674
CERTAIN CONDITIONS ORIGINATING IN THE PERINATAL PERIOD (P00-P96)
Infections specific to the perinatal period
(P35-P39)
Includes:
Excludes:
P35
P37.3
infections acquired in utero or during birth
asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection status (Z21)
congenital:
•
gonococcal infection (A54.-)
•
pneumonia (P23.-)
•
syphilis (A50.-)
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease (B24)
infectious diseases acquired after birth (A00-B99, J09-J11)
intestinal infectious diseases (A00-A09)
laboratory evidence of human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] (R75)
maternal infectious disease as a cause of mortality or morbidity in fetus or newborn not itself manifesting the
disease (P00.2)
tetanus neonatorum (A33)
Congenital viral diseases
P35.0 Congenital rubella syndrome
     Includes:
    Congenital rubella pneumonitis
P35.1 Congenital cytomegalovirus infection
P35.2 Congenital herpesviral [herpes simplex] infection
P35.3 Congenital viral hepatitis
P35.8 Other congenital viral diseases
     Includes:
    Congenital varicella [chickenpox]
P35.9 Congenital viral disease, unspecified
P36
Bacterial sepsis of newborn
Includes:
congenital septicaemia
P36.0 Sepsis of newborn due to streptococcus, group B
P36.1 Sepsis of newborn due to other and unspecified streptococci
P36.2 Sepsis of newborn due to Staphylococcus aureus
P36.3 Sepsis of newborn due to other and unspecified staphylococci
P36.4 Sepsis of newborn due to Escherichia coli
P36.5 Sepsis of newborn due to anaerobes
P36.8 Other bacterial sepsis of newborn
P36.9 Bacterial sepsis of newborn, unspecified
P37
Other congenital infectious and parasitic diseases
Excludes:
congenital syphilis (A50.-)
necrotizing enterocolitis of fetus or newborn (P77)
neonatal diarrhoea:
•
infectious (A00-A09)
•
noninfective (P78.3)
ophthalmia neonatorum due to gonococcus (A54.3)
tetanus neonatorum (A33)
P37.0 Congenital tuberculosis
P37.1 Congenital toxoplasmosis
     Includes:
    Hydrocephalus due to congenital toxoplasmosis
P37.2 Neonatal (disseminated) listeriosis
P37.3 Congenital falciparum malaria
675
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
P37.4 
P37.4
Other congenital malaria
P37.5 Neonatal candidiasis
P37.50o Topical or gastrointestinal neonatal candidiasis
       Includes:
      Neonatal candidiasis:
     •
      mucocutaneous
     •
      oral
     •
      perineal
P37.51o Invasive neonatal candidiasis
       Includes:
      Generalized (disseminated) neonatal candidal sepsis
     Neonatal pulmonary candidiasis
    Systemic neonatal candidiasis
P37.58o Other neonatal candidiasis
P37.59o Neonatal candidiasis, unspecified
P37.8 Other specified congenital infectious and parasitic diseases
P37.9 Congenital infectious and parasitic disease, unspecified
P38 Omphalitis of newborn with or without mild haemorrhage
P39 Other infections specific to the perinatal period
P39.0 Neonatal infective mastitis
     Excludes:
    breast engorgement of newborn (P83.4)
   noninfective mastitis of newborn (P83.4)
P39.1 Neonatal conjunctivitis and dacryocystitis
     Includes:
    Neonatal chlamydial conjunctivitis
   Ophthalmia neonatorum NOS
  Excludes:
 gonococcal conjunctivitis (A54.3)
P39.2 Intra-amniotic infection of fetus, not elsewhere classified
P39.3 Neonatal urinary tract infection
P39.4 Neonatal skin infection
     Includes:
    Neonatal pyoderma
   Excludes:
  pemphigus neonatorum (L00)
 staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (L00)
P39.8 Other specified infections specific to the perinatal period
P39.9 Infection specific to the perinatal period, unspecified
676
CERTAIN CONDITIONS ORIGINATING IN THE PERINATAL PERIOD (P00-P96)
Haemorrhagic and haematological disorders of fetus and
newborn
(P50-P61)
Excludes:
P50
P53
congenital stenosis and stricture of bile ducts (Q44.3)
Crigler-Najjar syndrome (E80.5)
Dubin-Johnson syndrome (E80.6)
Gilbert's syndrome (E80.4)
hereditary haemolytic anaemias (D55-D58)
Fetal blood loss
Excludes:
congenital anaemia from fetal blood loss (P61.3)
omphalitis with mild haemorrhage (P38)
P50.0 Fetal blood loss from vasa praevia
P50.1 Fetal blood loss from ruptured cord
P50.2 Fetal blood loss from placenta
P50.3 Haemorrhage into co-twin
P50.4 Haemorrhage into maternal circulation
P50.5 Fetal blood loss from cut end of co-twin's cord
P50.8 Other fetal blood loss
     Includes:
    Fetal blood loss from cut cord NEC
   Slipped umbilical ligature NOS
  Umbilical haemorrhage NOS
 Excludes:
fetal blood loss from cut end of co-twin's cord (P50.5)
P50.9 Fetal blood loss, unspecified
     Includes:
    Fetal haemorrhage NOS
P52
Intracranial nontraumatic haemorrhage of fetus and newborn
Includes:
Excludes:
intracranial haemorrhage due to anoxia or hypoxia
intracranial haemorrhage due to injury:
•
birth (P10.-)
•
maternal (P00.5)
•
other (S06.-)
P52.0 Intraventricular (nontraumatic) haemorrhage, grade 1, of fetus and newborn
     Includes:
    Subependymal haemorrhage (without intraventricular extension)
P52.1 Intraventricular (nontraumatic) haemorrhage, grade 2, of fetus and newborn
     Includes:
    Subependymal haemorrhage with intraventricular extension
P52.2 Intraventricular (nontraumatic) haemorrhage, grade 3, of fetus and newborn
     Includes:
    Subependymal haemorrhage with both intraventricular and intracerebral extension
P52.3 Unspecified intraventricular (nontraumatic) haemorrhage of fetus and newborn
P52.4 Intracerebral (nontraumatic) haemorrhage of fetus and newborn
P52.5 Subarachnoid (nontraumatic) haemorrhage of fetus and newborn
P52.6 Cerebellar (nontraumatic) and posterior fossa haemorrhage of fetus and newborn
P52.8 Other intracranial (nontraumatic) haemorrhages of fetus and newborn
P52.9 Intracranial (nontraumatic) haemorrhage of fetus and newborn, unspecified
P53
Haemorrhagic disease of fetus and newborn
Includes:
Vitamin K deficiency of newborn
677
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
P54
Other neonatal haemorrhages
Excludes:
P54
fetal blood loss (P50.-)
pulmonary haemorrhage originating in the perinatal period (P26.-)
P54.0 Neonatal haematemesis
     Excludes:
    that due to swallowed maternal blood (P78.2)
P54.1 Neonatal melaena
     Excludes:
    that due to swallowed maternal blood (P78.2)
P54.2 Neonatal rectal haemorrhage
P54.3 Other neonatal gastrointestinal haemorrhage
P54.4 Neonatal adrenal haemorrhage
P54.5 Neonatal cutaneous haemorrhage
     Includes:
    Bruising
   Ecchymoses
  Petechiae
 Superficial haematomata
Excludes:
in fetus or newborn
bruising of scalp due to birth injury (P12.3)
cephalhaematoma due to birth injury (P12.0)
P54.6 Neonatal vaginal haemorrhage
     Includes:
    Pseudomenses
P54.8 Other specified neonatal haemorrhages
P54.9 Neonatal haemorrhage, unspecified
P55
Haemolytic disease of fetus and newborn
P55.0 Rh isoimmunization of fetus and newborn
P55.1 ABO isoimmunization of fetus and newborn
P55.8 Other haemolytic diseases of fetus and newborn
P55.9 Haemolytic disease of fetus and newborn, unspecified
P56
Hydrops fetalis due to haemolytic disease
Excludes:
hydrops fetalis NOS (P83.2)
not due to haemolytic disease (P83.2)
P56.0 Hydrops fetalis due to isoimmunization
P56.9 Hydrops fetalis due to other and unspecified haemolytic disease
P57
Kernicterus
P57.0 Kernicterus due to isoimmunization
P57.8 Other specified kernicterus
     Excludes:
    Crigler-Najjar syndrome (E80.5)
P57.9 Kernicterus, unspecified
P58
Neonatal jaundice due to other excessive haemolysis
Excludes:
jaundice due to isoimmunization (P55-P57)
P58.0 Neonatal jaundice due to bruising
P58.1 Neonatal jaundice due to bleeding
P58.2 Neonatal jaundice due to infection
P58.3 Neonatal jaundice due to polycythaemia
678
CERTAIN CONDITIONS ORIGINATING IN THE PERINATAL PERIOD (P00-P96)
P58.4 Neonatal jaundice due to drugs or toxins transmitted from mother or given to newborn
     Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
P58.5 Neonatal jaundice due to swallowed maternal blood
P58.8 Neonatal jaundice due to other specified excessive haemolysis
P58.9 Neonatal jaundice due to excessive haemolysis, unspecified
P59
P61.9
Neonatal jaundice from other and unspecified causes
Excludes:
due to inborn errors of metabolism (E70-E90)
kernicterus (P57.-)
P59.0 Neonatal jaundice associated with preterm delivery
     Includes:
    Hyperbilirubinaemia of prematurity
   Jaundice due to delayed conjugation associated with preterm delivery
P59.1 Inspissated bile syndrome
P59.2 Neonatal jaundice from other and unspecified hepatocellular damage
     Includes:
    Fetal or neonatal (idiopathic) hepatitis
   Giant cell hepatitis
  Excludes:
 congenital viral hepatitis (P35.3)
P59.3 Neonatal jaundice from breast milk inhibitor
P59.8 Neonatal jaundice from other specified causes
P59.9 Neonatal jaundice, unspecified
     Includes:
    Physiological jaundice (intense)(prolonged) NOS
P60
Disseminated intravascular coagulation of fetus and newborn
Includes:
P61
Defibrination syndrome of fetus or newborn
Other perinatal haematological disorders
Excludes:
transient hypogammaglobulinaemia of infancy (D80.7)
P61.0 Transient neonatal thrombocytopenia
     Includes:
    Neonatal thrombocytopenia due to:
   •
    exchange transfusion
   •
    idiopathic maternal thrombocytopenia
   •
    isoimmunization
P61.1 Polycythaemia neonatorum
P61.2 Anaemia of prematurity
P61.3 Congenital anaemia from fetal blood loss
P61.4 Other congenital anaemias, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Congenital anaemia NOS
P61.5 Transient neonatal neutropenia
P61.6 Other transient neonatal disorders of coagulation
P61.8 Other specified perinatal haematological disorders
P61.9 Perinatal haematological disorder, unspecified
679
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
P70
Transitory endocrine and metabolic disorders specific to fetus
and newborn
(P70-P74)
Includes:
P70
transitory endocrine and metabolic disturbances caused by the infant's response to maternal endocrine and
metabolic factors, or its adjustment to extrauterine existence
Transitory disorders of carbohydrate metabolism specific to fetus and
newborn
P70.0 Syndrome of infant of mother with gestational diabetes
     Includes:
    Fetus or newborn (with hypoglycaemia) affected by maternal gestational diabetes
P70.1 Syndrome of infant of a diabetic mother
     Includes:
    Fetus or newborn (with hypoglycaemia) affected by maternal diabetes mellitus (pre-existing)
P70.2 Neonatal diabetes mellitus
P70.3 Iatrogenic neonatal hypoglycaemia
P70.4 Other neonatal hypoglycaemia
     Includes:
    Transitory neonatal hypoglycaemia
P70.8 Other transitory disorders of carbohydrate metabolism of fetus and newborn
P70.9 Transitory disorder of carbohydrate metabolism of fetus and newborn, unspecified
P71
Transitory neonatal disorders of calcium and magnesium metabolism
P71.0 Cow's milk hypocalcaemia in newborn
P71.1 Other neonatal hypocalcaemia
     Excludes:
    neonatal hypoparathyroidism (P71.4)
P71.2 Neonatal hypomagnesaemia
P71.3 Neonatal tetany without calcium or magnesium deficiency
     Includes:
    Neonatal tetany NOS
P71.4 Transitory neonatal hypoparathyroidism
P71.8 Other transitory neonatal disorders of calcium and magnesium metabolism
P71.9 Transitory neonatal disorder of calcium and magnesium metabolism, unspecified
P72
Other transitory neonatal endocrine disorders
Excludes:
congenital hypothyroidism with or without goitre (E03.0-E03.1)
dyshormogenetic goitre (E07.1)
Pendred's syndrome (E07.1)
P72.0 Neonatal goitre, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Transitory congenital goitre with normal function
P72.1 Transitory neonatal hyperthyroidism
     Includes:
    Neonatal thyrotoxicosis
P72.2 Other transitory neonatal disorders of thyroid function, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Transitory neonatal hypothyroidism
P72.8 Other specified transitory neonatal endocrine disorders
P72.9 Transitory neonatal endocrine disorder, unspecified
P74
Other transitory neonatal electrolyte and metabolic disturbances
P74.0 Late metabolic acidosis of newborn
P74.1 Dehydration of newborn
680
CERTAIN CONDITIONS ORIGINATING IN THE PERINATAL PERIOD (P00-P96)
P74.2 Disturbances of sodium balance of newborn
P74.20o Hyponatraemia of newborn
P74.21o Hypernatraemia of newborn
P74.29o Unspecified disturbance of sodium balance of newborn
P74.3 Disturbances of potassium balance of newborn
P74.30o Hypokalaemia of newborn
P74.31o Hyperkalaemia of newborn
P74.39o Unspecified disturbance of potassium balance of newborn
P74.4 Other transitory electrolyte disturbances of newborn
P74.5 Transitory tyrosinaemia of newborn
P74.8 Other transitory metabolic disturbances of newborn
P74.9 Transitory metabolic disturbance of newborn, unspecified
P74.9
681
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
P75*
Digestive system disorders of fetus and newborn
(P75-P78)
P75* Meconium ileus in cystic fibrosis (E84.1†)
P76 Other intestinal obstruction of newborn
P76.0 Meconium plug syndrome
     Includes:
    Meconium ileus in cases where cystic fibrosis is known not to be present
P76.1 Transitory ileus of newborn
     Excludes:
    Hirschsprung's disease (Q43.1)
P76.2 Intestinal obstruction due to inspissated milk
P76.8 Other specified intestinal obstruction of newborn
     Excludes:
    intestinal obstruction classifiable to (K56.0-K56.5)
P76.9 Intestinal obstruction of newborn, unspecified
P77 Necrotizing enterocolitis of fetus and newborn
P78 Other perinatal digestive system disorders
Excludes:
neonatal gastrointestinal haemorrhages (P54.0-P54.3)
P78.0 Perinatal intestinal perforation
     Includes:
    Meconium peritonitis
P78.1 Other neonatal peritonitis
     Includes:
    Neonatal peritonitis NOS
P78.2 Neonatal haematemesis and melaena due to swallowed maternal blood
P78.3 Noninfective neonatal diarrhoea
     Includes:
    Neonatal diarrhoea NOS
   Excludes:
  neonatal diarrhoea NOS in countries where the condition can be presumed to be of infectious
 origin (A09)
P78.8 Other specified perinatal digestive system disorders
P78.80o Congenital cirrhosis (of liver)
P78.81o Neonatal oesophageal reflux
       Includes:
      Gastro-oesophageal reflux in the newborn (infant)
P78.88o Other specified perinatal digestive system disorders
       Includes:
      Peptic ulcer of newborn
P78.9 Perinatal digestive system disorder, unspecified
682
CERTAIN CONDITIONS ORIGINATING IN THE PERINATAL PERIOD (P00-P96)
Conditions involving the integument and temperature
regulation of fetus and newborn
(P80-P83)
P80
P83.9
Hypothermia of newborn
P80.0 Cold injury syndrome
     Includes:
    Severe and usually chronic hypothermia associated with a pink flushed appearance, oedema and
   neurological and biochemical abnormalities.
  Excludes:
 mild hypothermia of newborn (P80.8)
P80.8 Other hypothermia of newborn
     Includes:
    Mild hypothermia of newborn
P80.9 Hypothermia of newborn, unspecified
P81
Other disturbances of temperature regulation of newborn
P81.0 Environmental hyperthermia of newborn
P81.8 Other specified disturbances of temperature regulation of newborn
P81.9 Disturbance of temperature regulation of newborn, unspecified
     Includes:
    Fever of newborn NOS
P83
Other conditions of integument specific to fetus and newborn
Excludes:
congenital malformations of skin and integument (Q80-Q84)
cradle cap (L21.0)
diaper [napkin] dermatitis (L22)
hydrops fetalis due to haemolytic disease (P56.-)
neonatal skin infection (P39.4)
staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (L00)
P83.0 Sclerema neonatorum
P83.1 Neonatal erythema toxicum
P83.2 Hydrops fetalis not due to haemolytic disease
     Includes:
    Hydrops fetalis NOS
P83.3 Other and unspecified oedema specific to fetus and newborn
P83.4 Breast engorgement of newborn
     Includes:
    Noninfective mastitis of newborn
P83.5 Congenital hydrocele
P83.6 Umbilical polyp of newborn
P83.8 Other specified conditions of integument specific to fetus and newborn
     Includes:
    Bronze baby syndrome
   Neonatal scleroderma
  Urticaria neonatorum
P83.9 Condition of integument specific to fetus and newborn, unspecified
683
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
P90
Other disorders originating in the perinatal period
(P90-P96)
P90
Convulsions of newborn
Excludes:
P91
benign neonatal convulsions (familial) (G40.3)
Other disturbances of cerebral status of newborn
P91.0 Neonatal cerebral ischaemia
P91.1 Acquired periventricular cysts of newborn
P91.2 Neonatal cerebral leukomalacia
P91.3 Neonatal cerebral irritability
P91.4 Neonatal cerebral depression
P91.5 Neonatal coma
P91.6 Hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy of newborn
P91.8 Other specified disturbances of cerebral status of newborn
P91.80o Neonatal (cerebral) ventriculomegaly
P91.88o Other specified disturbances of cerebral status of newborn
P91.9 Disturbance of cerebral status of newborn, unspecified
P92
Feeding problems of newborn
P92.0 Vomiting in newborn
P92.1 Regurgitation and rumination in newborn
P92.2 Slow feeding of newborn
P92.3 Underfeeding of newborn
P92.4 Overfeeding of newborn
P92.5 Neonatal difficulty in feeding at breast
P92.8 Other feeding problems of newborn
     Includes:
    Feeding intolerance of newborn
P92.9 Feeding problem of newborn, unspecified
P93
Reactions and intoxications due to drugs administered to fetus and newborn
Includes:
Excludes:
P94
Grey syndrome from chloramphenicol administration in newborn
jaundice due to drugs or toxins transmitted from mother or given to newborn (P58.4)
reactions and intoxications from maternal opiates, tranquillizers and other medication (P04.0-
P04.1, P04.4)
withdrawal symptoms from:
•
maternal use of drugs of addiction (P96.1)
•
therapeutic use of drugs in newborn (P96.2)
Disorders of muscle tone of newborn
P94.0 Transient neonatal myasthenia gravis
     Excludes:
    myasthenia gravis (G70.0)
P94.1 Congenital hypertonia
P94.2 Congenital hypotonia
     Includes:
    Nonspecific floppy baby syndrome
P94.8 Other disorders of muscle tone of newborn
P94.9 Disorder of muscle tone of newborn, unspecified
684
CERTAIN CONDITIONS ORIGINATING IN THE PERINATAL PERIOD (P00-P96)
P95
Fetal death of unspecified cause
Includes:
P96
Deadborn fetus NOS
Stillbirth NOS
P96.9
Other conditions originating in the perinatal period
P96.0 Congenital renal failure
     Includes:
    Uraemia of newborn
P96.1 Neonatal withdrawal symptoms from maternal use of drugs of addiction
     Includes:
    Drug withdrawal syndrome in infant of dependent mother
   Excludes:
  reactions and intoxications from maternal opiates and tranquillizers administered during labour
 and delivery (P04.0)
P96.2 Withdrawal symptoms from therapeutic use of drugs in newborn
P96.3 Wide cranial sutures of newborn
     Includes:
    Neonatal craniotabes
P96.4 Termination of pregnancy, affecting fetus and newborn
     Excludes:
    termination of pregnancy (affecting mother) (O04.-)
P96.5 Complications of intrauterine procedures, not elsewhere classified
P96.8 Other specified conditions originating in the perinatal period
P96.9 Condition originating in the perinatal period, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital debility NOS
685
I
CHAPTER XVII
Congenital malformations, deformations and
chromosomal abnormalities
(Q00-Q99)
Excludes:
inborn errors of metabolism (E70-E90)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
Q00-Q07
Q10-Q18
Q20-Q28
Q30-Q34
Q35-Q37
Q38-Q45
Q50-Q56
Q60-Q64
Q65-Q79
Q80-Q89
Q90-Q99
Congenital malformations of the nervous system
Congenital malformations of eye, ear, face and neck
Congenital malformations of the circulatory system
Congenital malformations of the respiratory system
Cleft lip and cleft palate
Other congenital malformations of the digestive system
Congenital malformations of genital organs
Congenital malformations of the urinary system
Congenital malformations and deformations of the musculoskeletal system
Other congenital malformations
Chromosomal abnormalities, not elsewhere classified
687
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q00
Congenital malformations of the nervous system
(Q00-Q07)
Q00
Anencephaly and similar malformations
Q00.0 Anencephaly
     Includes:
    Acephaly
   Acrania
  Amyelencephaly
 Hemianencephaly
Hemicephaly
Q00.1 Craniorachischisis
Q00.2 Iniencephaly
Q01
Encephalocele
Includes:
Excludes:
encephalomyelocele
hydroencephalocele
hydromeningocele, cranial
meningocele, cerebral
meningoencephalocele
Meckel-Gruber syndrome (Q61.9)
Q01.0 Frontal encephalocele
Q01.1 Nasofrontal encephalocele
Q01.2 Occipital encephalocele
Q01.8 Encephalocele of other sites
Q01.9 Encephalocele, unspecified
Q02
Microcephaly
Includes:
Excludes:
Q03
Hydromicrocephaly
Micrencephalon
Meckel-Gruber syndrome (Q61.9)
Congenital hydrocephalus
Includes:
Excludes:
hydrocephalus in newborn
Arnold-Chiari syndrome (Q07.0)
hydrocephalus:
•
acquired (G91.-)
•
due to congenital toxoplasmosis (P37.1)
•
with spina bifida (Q05.0-Q05.4)
Q03.0 Malformations of aqueduct of Sylvius
     Includes:
    Aqueduct of Sylvius:
   •
    anomaly
   •
    obstruction, congenital
   •
    stenosis
Q03.1 Atresia of foramina of Magendie and Luschka
     Includes:
    Dandy-Walker syndrome
Q03.8 Other congenital hydrocephalus
Q03.9 Congenital hydrocephalus, unspecified
688
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q04
Other congenital malformations of brain
Excludes:
cyclopia (Q87.0)
macrocephaly (Q75.3)
Q05.1
Q04.0 Congenital malformations of corpus callosum
     Includes:
    Agenesis of corpus callosum
Q04.1 Arhinencephaly
Q04.2 Holoprosencephaly
Q04.3 Other reduction deformities of brain
     Includes:
    Absence
   Agenesis
  Aplasia
 Hypoplasia
Excludes:
of part of brain
Agyria
Hydranencephaly
Lissencephaly
Microgyria
Pachygyria
congenital malformations of corpus callosum (Q04.0)
Q04.4 Septo-optic dysplasia
Q04.5 Megalencephaly
Q04.6 Congenital cerebral cysts
     Includes:
    Porencephaly
   Schizencephaly
  Excludes:
 acquired porencephalic cyst (G93.0)
Q04.8 Other specified congenital malformations of brain
     Includes:
    Macrogyria
Q04.9 Congenital malformation of brain, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital:
•
•
•
•
Q05
anomaly
deformity
disease or lesion
multiple anomalies
NOS of brain
Spina bifida
Includes:
Excludes:
hydromeningocele (spinal)
meningocele (spinal)
meningomyelocele
myelocele
myelomeningocele
rachischisis
spina bifida (aperta)(cystica)
syringomyelocele
Arnold-Chiari syndrome (Q07.0)
spina bifida occulta (Q76.0)
Q05.0 Cervical spina bifida with hydrocephalus
Q05.1 Thoracic spina bifida with hydrocephalus
     Includes:
    Spina bifida:
   •
    dorsal
   with hydrocephalus
  •
   thoracolumbar
689
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q05.2 
Q05.2
Lumbar spina bifida with hydrocephalus
Includes:
Lumbosacral spina bifida with hydrocephalus
Q05.3 Sacral spina bifida with hydrocephalus
Q05.4 Unspecified spina bifida with hydrocephalus
Q05.5 Cervical spina bifida without hydrocephalus
Q05.6 Thoracic spina bifida without hydrocephalus
     Includes:
    Spina bifida:
   •
    dorsal NOS
   •
    thoracolumbar NOS
Q05.7 Lumbar spina bifida without hydrocephalus
     Includes:
    Lumbosacral spina bifida NOS
Q05.8 Sacral spina bifida without hydrocephalus
Q05.9 Spina bifida, unspecified
Q06
Other congenital malformations of spinal cord
Q06.0 Amyelia
Q06.1 Hypoplasia and dysplasia of spinal cord
     Includes:
    Atelomyelia
   Myelatelia
  Myelodysplasia of spinal cord
Q06.2 Diastematomyelia
Q06.3 Other congenital cauda equina malformations
Q06.4 Hydromyelia
     Includes:
    Hydrorachis
Q06.8 Other specified congenital malformations of spinal cord
Q06.9 Congenital malformation of spinal cord, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    anomaly
   •
    deformity
   NOS of spinal cord or meninges
  •
   disease or lesion
Q07
Other congenital malformations of nervous system
Excludes:
familial dysautonomia [Riley-Day] (G90.1)
neurofibromatosis (nonmalignant) (Q85.0)
Q07.0 Arnold-Chiari syndrome
Q07.8 Other specified congenital malformations of nervous system
     Includes:
    Agenesis of nerve
   Displacement of brachial plexus
  Jaw-winking syndrome
 Marcus Gunn's syndrome
Q07.9 Congenital malformation of nervous system, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital:
•
•
•
690
anomaly
deformity
disease or lesion
NOS of nervous system
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Congenital malformations of eye, ear, face and neck
(Q10-Q18)
Excludes:
Q10
Q11.3
cleft lip and cleft palate (Q35-Q37)
congenital malformation of:
•
cervical spine (Q05.0,Q05.5,Q67.5,Q76.0-Q76.4)
•
larynx (Q31.-)
•
lip NEC (Q38.0)
•
nose (Q30.-)
•
parathyroid gland (Q89.2)
•
thyroid gland (Q89.2)
Congenital malformations of eyelid, lacrimal apparatus and orbit
Excludes:
cryptophthalmos:
•
NOS (Q11.2)
•
syndrome (Q87.0)
Q10.0 Congenital ptosis
Q10.1 Congenital ectropion
Q10.2 Congenital entropion
Q10.3 Other congenital malformations of eyelid
     Includes:
    Ablepharon
   Absence or agenesis of:
  •
   cilia
  •
   eyelid
  Accessory:
 •
  eye muscle
 •
  eyelid
 Blepharophimosis, congenital
Coloboma of eyelid
Congenital malformation of eyelid NOS
Q10.4 Absence and agenesis of lacrimal apparatus
     Includes:
    Absence of punctum lacrimale
Q10.5 Congenital stenosis and stricture of lacrimal duct
Q10.6 Other congenital malformations of lacrimal apparatus
     Includes:
    Congenital malformation of lacrimal apparatus NOS
Q10.7 Congenital malformation of orbit
Q11
Anophthalmos, microphthalmos and macrophthalmos
Q11.0 Cystic eyeball
Q11.1 Other anophthalmos
     Includes:
    Agenesis
   Aplasia
Q11.2
Microphthalmos
Includes:
Cryptophthalmos NOS
Dysplasia
Hypoplasia
Excludes:
Q11.3
of eye
of eye
Rudimentary eye
cryptophthalmos syndrome (Q87.0)
Macrophthalmos
Excludes:
macrophthalmos in congenital glaucoma (Q15.0)
691
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q12
Q12
Congenital lens malformations
Q12.0 Congenital cataract
Q12.1 Congenital displaced lens
Q12.2 Coloboma of lens
Q12.3 Congenital aphakia
Q12.4 Spherophakia
Q12.8 Other congenital lens malformations
Q12.9 Congenital lens malformation, unspecified
Q13
Congenital malformations of anterior segment of eye
Q13.0 Coloboma of iris
     Includes:
    Coloboma NOS
Q13.1 Absence of iris
     Includes:
    Aniridia
Q13.2 Other congenital malformations of iris
     Includes:
    Anisocoria, congenital
   Atresia of pupil
  Congenital malformation of iris NOS
 Corectopia
Q13.3 Congenital corneal opacity
Q13.4 Other congenital corneal malformations
     Includes:
    Congenital malformation of cornea NOS
   Microcornea
  Peter's anomaly
Q13.5 Blue sclera
Q13.8 Other congenital malformations of anterior segment of eye
     Includes:
    Rieger's anomaly
Q13.9 Congenital malformation of anterior segment of eye, unspecified
Q14
Congenital malformations of posterior segment of eye
Q14.0 Congenital malformation of vitreous humour
     Includes:
    Congenital vitreous opacity
Q14.1 Congenital malformation of retina
     Includes:
    Congenital retinal aneurysm
Q14.2 Congenital malformation of optic disc
     Includes:
    Coloboma of optic disc
Q14.3 Congenital malformation of choroid
Q14.8 Other congenital malformations of posterior segment of eye
     Includes:
    Coloboma of the fundus
Q14.9 Congenital malformation of posterior segment of eye, unspecified
692
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q15
Other congenital malformations of eye
Excludes:
Q15.0
congenital nystagmus (H55)
ocular albinism (E70.3)
retinitis pigmentosa (H35.5)
Q17.3
Congenital glaucoma
Includes:
Buphthalmos
Glaucoma of newborn
Hydrophthalmos
Keratoglobus, congenital
Macrocornea
with glaucoma
Macrophthalmos in congenital glaucoma
Megalocornea with glaucoma
Q15.8 Other specified congenital malformations of eye
Q15.9 Congenital malformation of eye, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital
   •
    anomaly
   NOS of eye
  •
   deformity
Q16
Congenital malformations of ear causing impairment of hearing
Excludes:
congenital deafness (H90.-)
Q16.0 Congenital absence of (ear) auricle
Q16.1 Congenital absence, atresia and stricture of auditory canal (external)
     Includes:
    Atresia or stricture of osseous meatus
Q16.2 Absence of eustachian tube
Q16.3 Congenital malformation of ear ossicles
     Includes:
    Fusion of ear ossicles
Q16.4 Other congenital malformations of middle ear
     Includes:
    Congenital malformation of middle ear NOS
Q16.5 Congenital malformation of inner ear
     Includes:
    Anomaly:
   •
    membranous labyrinth
   •
    organ of Corti
Q16.9 Congenital malformation of ear causing impairment of hearing, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital absence of ear NOS
Q17
Other congenital malformations of ear
Excludes:
preauricular sinus (Q18.1)
Q17.0 Accessory auricle
     Includes:
    Accessory tragus
   Polyotia
  Preauricular appendage or tag
 Supernumerary:
•
 ear
•
 lobule
Q17.1 Macrotia
Q17.2 Microtia
Q17.3 Other misshapen ear
     Includes:
    Pointed ear
693
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q17.4 Misplaced ear
     Includes:
    Low-set ears
   Excludes:
  cervical auricle (Q18.2)
Q17.5 Prominent ear
     Includes:
    Bat ear
Q17.8 Other specified congenital malformations of ear
     Includes:
    Congenital absence of lobe of ear
Q17.9 Congenital malformation of ear, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital anomaly of ear NOS
Q17.4
Q18
Other congenital malformations of face and neck
Excludes:
cleft lip and cleft palate (Q35-Q37)
conditions classified to Q67.0-Q67.4
congenital malformations of skull and face bones (Q75.-)
cyclopia (Q87.0)
dentofacial anomalies [including malocclusion] (K07.-)
malformation syndromes affecting facial appearance (Q87.0)
persistent thyroglossal duct (Q89.2)
Q18.0 Sinus, fistula and cyst of branchial cleft
     Includes:
    Branchial vestige
Q18.1 Preauricular sinus and cyst
     Includes:
    Fistula (of):
   •
    auricle, congenital
   •
    cervicoaural
   Pretragal sinus and cyst
Q18.2 Other branchial cleft malformations
     Includes:
    Branchial cleft malformation NOS
   Cervical auricle
  Otocephaly
Q18.3 Webbing of neck
     Includes:
    Pterygium colli
Q18.4 Macrostomia
Q18.5 Microstomia
Q18.6 Macrocheilia
     Includes:
    Hypertrophy of lip, congenital
Q18.7 Microcheilia
Q18.8 Other specified congenital malformations of face and neck
     Includes:
    Medial:
   •
    cyst
   •
    fistula
   of face and neck
  •
   sinus
Q18.9 Congenital malformation of face and neck, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital anomaly NOS of face and neck
694
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Congenital malformations of the circulatory system
(Q20-Q28)
Q20
Q21.2
Congenital malformations of cardiac chambers and connections
Excludes:
dextrocardia
mirror-image atrial arrangement
with situs inversus (Q89.3)
Q20.0 Common arterial trunk
     Includes:
    Persistent truncus arteriosus
Q20.1 Double outlet right ventricle
     Includes:
    Incomplete (partial) transposition of great vessels
   Taussig-Bing syndrome
Q20.2 Double outlet left ventricle
Q20.3 Transposition of great vessels [TGV]
Q20.30o Dextratransposition of aorta
Q20.31o Complete transposition of great vessels
       Excludes:
      incomplete transposition of great vessels(Q20.1)
Q20.32o Congenitally corrected transposition of great vessels
Q20.38o Other transposition of great vessels NEC
Q20.4 Double inlet ventricle
     Includes:
    Common ventricle
   Cor triloculare biatriatum
  Single ventricle
Q20.5 Discordant atrioventricular connection
Q20.50o Discordant atrioventricular connection with corrected transposition
       Includes:
      Corrected transposition of atrioventricular connection
Q20.58o Discordant atrioventricular connection NEC
       Includes:
      Laevotransposition
     Ventricular inversion
Q20.6 Isomerism of atrial appendages
     Includes:
    Isomerism of atrial appendages with asplenia or polysplenia
Q20.8 Other congenital malformations of cardiac chambers and connections
Q20.9 Congenital malformation of cardiac chambers and connections, unspecified
Q21
Congenital malformations of cardiac septa
Excludes:
acquired cardiac septal defect (I51.0)
Q21.0 Ventricular septal defect
Q21.1 Atrial septal defect
     Includes:
    Coronary sinus defect
   Patent or persistent:
  •
   foramen ovale
  •
   ostium secundum defect (type II)
  Sinus venosus defect
Q21.2 Atrioventricular septal defect
     Includes:
    Common atrioventricular canal
   Endocardial cushion defect
  Ostium primum atrial septal defect (type I)
695
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q21.3 Tetralogy of Fallot
     Includes:
    Ventricular septal defect with pulmonary stenosis or atresia, dextroposition of aorta and
   hypertrophy of right ventricle.
Q21.4 Aortopulmonary septal defect
     Includes:
    Aortic septal defect
   Aortopulmonary window
Q21.8 Other congenital malformations of cardiac septa
     Includes:
    Eisenmenger's defect
   Pentalogy of Fallot
  Excludes:
 Eisenmenger's complex (I27.8)
Eisenmenger's syndrome (I27.8)
Q21.9 Congenital malformation of cardiac septum, unspecified
     Includes:
    Septal (heart) defect NOS
Q21.3
Q22
Congenital malformations of pulmonary and tricuspid valves
Q22.0 Pulmonary valve atresia
Q22.1 Congenital pulmonary valve stenosis
Q22.2 Congenital pulmonary valve insufficiency
     Includes:
    Congenital pulmonary valve regurgitation
Q22.3 Other congenital malformations of pulmonary valve
     Includes:
    Congenital malformation of pulmonary valve NOS
Q22.4 Congenital tricuspid atresia
Q22.5 Ebstein's anomaly
Q22.6 Hypoplastic right heart syndrome
Q22.8 Other congenital malformations of tricuspid valve
     Includes:
    Congenital tricuspid stenosis
Q22.9 Congenital malformation of tricuspid valve, unspecified
Q23
Congenital malformations of aortic and mitral valves
Q23.0 Congenital stenosis of aortic valve
     Includes:
    Congenital aortic:
   •
    atresia
   •
    stenosis
   Excludes:
  congenital subaortic stenosis (Q24.4)
 that in hypoplastic left heart syndrome (Q23.4)
Q23.1 Congenital insufficiency of aortic valve
     Includes:
    Bicuspid aortic valve
   Congenital aortic insufficiency
Q23.2 Congenital mitral stenosis
     Includes:
    Congenital mitral atresia
Q23.3 Congenital mitral insufficiency
Q23.4 Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
     Includes:
    Atresia, or marked hypoplasia of aortic orifice or valve, with hypoplasia of ascending aorta and
   defective development of left ventricle (with mitral valve stenosis or atresia).
Q23.8 Other congenital malformations of aortic and mitral valves
     Includes:
    Cleft mitral valve
   Excludes:
  that with mention of multiple valve involvement (I08.-)
Q23.9 Congenital malformation of aortic and mitral valves, unspecified
696
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q24
Other congenital malformations of heart
Excludes:
Q24.0
endocardial fibroelastosis (I42.4)
Dextrocardia
Excludes:
dextrocardia
mirror-image atrial arrangement
Q25.3
with situs inversus (Q89.3)
isomerism of atrial appendages (with asplenia or polysplenia) (Q20.6)
Q24.1 Laevocardia
     Note:
    Location of heart in left hemithorax with apex pointing to the left, but with situs inversus of other
   viscera and defects of the heart, or corrected transposition of great vessels.
Q24.2 Cor triatriatum
Q24.3 Pulmonary infundibular stenosis
Q24.4 Congenital subaortic stenosis
Q24.5 Malformation of coronary vessels
     Includes:
    Absence of coronary artery
   Congenital coronary (artery) aneurysm
Q24.6 Congenital heart block
Q24.8 Other specified congenital malformations of heart
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    diverticulum of left ventricle
   •
    malformation of:
   •
    myocardium
   •
    pericardium
   Malposition of heart
  Uhl's disease
Q24.9 Congenital malformation of heart, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    anomaly
   NOS of heart
  •
   disease
Q25
Congenital malformations of great arteries
Q25.0 Patent ductus arteriosus
     Includes:
    Persistent ductus arteriosus
Q25.1 Coarctation of aorta
     Includes:
    Coarctation of aorta (preductal)(postductal)
Q25.2 Atresia of aorta
Q25.3 Stenosis of aorta
     Includes:
    Supravalvular aortic stenosis
   Excludes:
  congenital aortic stenosis (Q23.0)
697
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q25.4
Q25.4
Other congenital malformations of aorta
Includes:
Aneurysm of sinus of Valsalva (ruptured)
Congenital:
•
aneurysm
•
dilatation
of aorta
Absence
Aplasia
Excludes:
Double aortic arch [vascular ring of aorta]
Hypoplasia of aorta
Persistent:
•
convolutions of aortic arch
•
right aortic arch
hypoplasia of aorta in hypoplastic left heart syndrome (Q23.4)
Q25.5 Atresia of pulmonary artery
Q25.6 Stenosis of pulmonary artery
     Includes:
    Supravalvular pulmonary stenosis
Q25.7 Other congenital malformations of pulmonary artery
     Includes:
    Aberrant
   Agenesis of
  Aneurysm, congenital of
 pulmonary artery
Anomaly of
Hypoplasia of
Pulmonary arteriovenous aneurysm
Q25.8 Other congenital malformations of great arteries
Q25.9 Congenital malformation of great arteries, unspecified
Q26
Congenital malformations of great veins
Q26.0 Congenital stenosis of vena cava
     Includes:
    Congenital stenosis of vena cava (inferior)(superior)
Q26.1 Persistent left superior vena cava
Q26.2 Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection
Q26.3 Partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection
Q26.4 Anomalous pulmonary venous connection, unspecified
Q26.5 Anomalous portal venous connection
Q26.6 Portal vein-hepatic artery fistula
Q26.8 Other congenital malformations of great veins
     Includes:
    Absence of vena cava (inferior)(superior)
   Azygos continuation of inferior vena cava
  Persistent left posterior cardinal vein
 Scimitar syndrome
Q26.9 Congenital malformation of great vein, unspecified
     Includes:
    Anomaly of vena cava (inferior)(superior) NOS
698
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q27
Other congenital malformations of peripheral vascular system
Excludes:
anomalies of:
•
cerebral and precerebral vessels (Q28.0-Q28.3)
•
coronary vessels (Q24.5)
•
pulmonary artery (Q25.5-Q25.7)
congenital retinal aneurysm (Q14.1)
haemangioma and lymphangioma (D18.-)
Q27.0 Congenital absence and hypoplasia of umbilical artery
     Includes:
    Single umbilical artery
Q27.1 Congenital renal artery stenosis
Q27.2 Other congenital malformations of renal artery
     Includes:
    Congenital malformation of renal artery NOS
   Multiple renal arteries
Q27.3 Peripheral arteriovenous malformation
     Includes:
    Arteriovenous aneurysm
   Excludes:
  acquired arteriovenous aneurysm (I77.0)
Q27.30o Peripheral arteriovenous malformation of upper limb
Q27.31o Peripheral arteriovenous malformation of lower limb
Q27.32o Peripheral arteriovenous malformation of digestive system vessel
Q27.33o Peripheral arteriovenous malformation of renal vessel
Q27.38o Peripheral arteriovenous malformation of other site
Q27.4 Congenital phlebectasia
Q27.8 
Q28.1
Other specified congenital malformations of peripheral vascular system
Includes:
Aberrant subclavian artery
Absence
of artery or vein NEC
Atresia
Congenital:
•
aneurysm (peripheral)
•
stricture, artery
•
varix
Q27.9
Q28
Congenital malformation of peripheral vascular system, unspecified
Includes:
Anomaly of artery or vein NOS
Other congenital malformations of circulatory system
Excludes:
congenital aneurysm:
•
NOS (Q27.8)
•
coronary (Q24.5)
•
peripheral (Q27.8)
•
pulmonary (Q25.7)
•
retinal (Q14.1)
ruptured:
•
cerebral arteriovenous malformation (I60.8)
•
malformation of precerebral vessels (I72.-)
Q28.0 Arteriovenous malformation of precerebral vessels
     Includes:
    Congenital arteriovenous precerebral aneurysm (nonruptured)
Q28.1 Other malformations of precerebral vessels
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    malformation of precerebral vessels NOS
   •
    precerebral aneurysm (nonruptured)
699
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q28.2 Arteriovenous malformation of cerebral vessels
     Includes:
    Arteriovenous malformation of brain NOS
   Congenital:
  •
   arteriovenous cerebral aneurysm (nonruptured)
  •
   berry aneurysm, nonruptured
Q28.3 Other malformations of cerebral vessels
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    cerebral aneurysm (nonruptured)
   •
    malformation of cerebral vessels NOS
Q28.8 Other specified congenital malformations of circulatory system
     Includes:
    Congenital aneurysm, specified site NEC
Q28.9 Congenital malformation of circulatory system, unspecified
Q28.2
700
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Congenital malformations of the respiratory system
(Q30-Q34)
Q30
Congenital malformations of nose
Excludes:
Q30.0
Q32.13o
congenital deviation of nasal septum (Q67.4)
Choanal atresia
Includes:
Atresia
Congenital stenosis
of nares (anterior)(posterior)
Q30.1 Agenesis and underdevelopment of nose
     Includes:
    Congenital absence of nose
Q30.2 Fissured, notched and cleft nose
Q30.3 Congenital perforated nasal septum
Q30.8 Other congenital malformations of nose
     Includes:
    Accessory nose
   Congenital anomaly of nasal sinus wall
Q30.9 Congenital malformation of nose, unspecified
Q31
Congenital malformations of larynx
Excludes:
congenital laryngeal stridor NOS (P28.8)
Q31.0 Web of larynx
     Includes:
    Web of larynx:
   •
    NOS
   •
    glottic
   •
    subglottic
Q31.1 Congenital subglottic stenosis
Q31.2 Laryngeal hypoplasia
Q31.3 Laryngocele
Q31.5 Congenital laryngomalacia
Q31.8 Other congenital malformations of larynx
     Includes:
    Absence
   Agenesis
  of cricoid cartilage, epiglottis, glottis, larynx or thyroid cartilage
 Atresia
Cleft thyroid cartilage
Congenital stenosis of larynx NEC
Fissure of epiglottis
Posterior cleft of cricoid cartilage
Q31.9 Congenital malformation of larynx, unspecified
Q32
Congenital malformations of trachea and bronchus
Excludes:
congenital bronchiectasis (Q33.4)
Q32.0 Congenital tracheomalacia
Q32.1 Other congenital malformations of trachea
Q32.10o Congenital malformation of tracheal cartilage
       Includes:
      Anomaly of tracheal cartilage
Q32.11o Congenital atresia of trachea
Q32.12o Congenital stenosis of trachea
Q32.13o Congenital tracheocele
701
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q32.18o 
Q32.18o
Other specified congenital malformation of trachea
Includes:
Dilation of trachea
Q32.2 Congenital bronchomalacia
Q32.3 Congenital stenosis of bronchus
Q32.4 Other congenital malformations of bronchus
     Includes:
    Absence
   Agenesis
  Atresia
 Congenital malformation NOS
Diverticulum
Q33
of bronchus
Congenital malformations of lung
Q33.0 Congenital cystic lung
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    honeycomb lung
   •
    lung disease:
   •
    cystic
   •
    polycystic
   Excludes:
  cystic lung disease, acquired or unspecified (J98.4)
Q33.1 Accessory lobe of lung
Q33.2 Sequestration of lung
Q33.3 Agenesis of lung
     Includes:
    Absence of lung (lobe)
Q33.4 Congenital bronchiectasis
Q33.5 Ectopic tissue in lung
Q33.6 Hypoplasia and dysplasia of lung
     Excludes:
    pulmonary hypoplasia associated with short gestation (P28.0)
Q33.8 Other congenital malformations of lung
Q33.9 Congenital malformation of lung, unspecified
Q34
Other congenital malformations of respiratory system
Q34.0 Anomaly of pleura
Q34.1 Congenital cyst of mediastinum
Q34.8 Other specified congenital malformations of respiratory system
     Includes:
    Atresia of nasopharynx
Q34.9 Congenital malformation of respiratory system, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    absence
   of respiratory organ
  •
   anomaly NOS
702
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Cleft lip and cleft palate
(Q35-Q37)
Q37
Use additional code (Q30.2) to identify associated malformations of the nose
Excludes:
Robin's syndrome (Q87.0)
Q35
Cleft palate
Includes:
Excludes:
fissure of palate
palatoschisis
cleft palate with cleft lip (Q37)
Q35.1 Cleft hard palate
Q35.3 Cleft soft palate
Q35.5 Cleft hard palate with cleft soft palate
Q35.7 Cleft uvula
Q35.9 Cleft palate, unspecified
     Includes:
    Cleft palate NOS
   Submucous cleft palate
Q36
Cleft lip
Includes:
Excludes:
Q37
cheiloschisis
congenital fissure of lip
harelip
labium leporinum
cleft lip with cleft palate (Q37)
Cleft palate with cleft lip
703
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q38
Other congenital malformations of the digestive system
(Q38-Q45)
Q38
Other congenital malformations of tongue, mouth and pharynx
Excludes:
macrostomia (Q18.4)
microstomia (Q18.5)
Q38.0 Congenital malformations of lips, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    fistula of lip
   •
    malformation of lip NOS
   Van der Woude's syndrome
  Excludes:
 cleft lip (Q36) with cleft palate (Q37)
macrocheilia (Q18.6)
microcheilia (Q18.7)
Q38.1 Ankyloglossia
     Includes:
    Tongue tie
Q38.2 Macroglossia
Q38.3 Other congenital malformations of tongue
     Includes:
    Aglossia
   Bifid tongue
  Congenital:
 •
  adhesion
 •
  fissure
 of tongue
•
 malformation NOS
Hypoglossia
Hypoplasia of tongue
Microglossia
Q38.4
Congenital malformations of salivary glands and ducts
Includes:
Absence
Accessory
(of) salivary gland or duct
Atresia
Congenital fistula of salivary gland
Congenital ranula
Q38.5 Congenital malformations of palate, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Absence of uvula
   Congenital malformation of palate NOS
  High arched palate
 Excludes:
cleft:
•
 palate (Q35)
•
 palate with cleft lip (Q37)
Q38.6 Other congenital malformations of mouth
     Includes:
    Congenital malformation of mouth NOS
Q38.7 Pharyngeal pouch
     Includes:
    Diverticulum of pharynx
   Excludes:
  pharyngeal pouch syndrome (D82.1)
Q38.8 Other congenital malformations of pharynx
     Includes:
    Congenital malformation of pharynx NOS
704
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q39
Congenital malformations of oesophagus
Q40.9
Q39.0 Atresia of oesophagus without fistula
     Includes:
    Atresia of oesophagus NOS
Q39.1 Atresia of oesophagus with tracheo-oesophageal fistula
     Includes:
    Atresia of oesophagus with broncho-oesophageal fistula
Q39.2 Congenital tracheo-oesophageal fistula without atresia
     Includes:
    Congenital tracheo-oesophageal fistula NOS
   Excludes:
  that with atresia of oesophagus (Q39.1)
Q39.3 Congenital stenosis and stricture of oesophagus
Q39.4 Oesophageal web
Q39.5 Congenital dilatation of oesophagus
Q39.6 Diverticulum of oesophagus
     Includes:
    Oesophageal pouch
Q39.8 Other congenital malformations of oesophagus
     Includes:
    Absent
   Congenital displacement
  (of) oesophagus
 Duplication
Q39.9 Congenital malformation of oesophagus, unspecified
Q40
Q40.0
Other congenital malformations of upper alimentary tract
Congenital hypertrophic pyloric stenosis
Includes:
Congenital or infantile:
•
•
•
•
•
Excludes:
constriction
hypertrophy
spasm
stenosis
stricture
of pylorus
pylorospasm without mention of pyloric stenosis (K31.3)
Q40.1 Congenital hiatus hernia
     Includes:
    Displacement of cardia through oesophageal hiatus
   Excludes:
  congenital diaphragmatic hernia (Q79.0)
Q40.2 Other specified congenital malformations of stomach
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    displacement of stomach
   •
    diverticulum of stomach
   •
    hourglass stomach
   Duplication of stomach
  Megalogastria
 Microgastria
Q40.3 Congenital malformation of stomach, unspecified
Q40.8 Other specified congenital malformations of upper alimentary tract
Q40.9 Congenital malformation of upper alimentary tract, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    anomaly
   NOS of upper alimentary tract
  •
   deformity
705
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q41
Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of small intestine
Includes:
Excludes:
Q41
congenital obstruction, occlusion and stricture of small intestine or intestine NOS
meconium ileus (E84.1)
Q41.0 Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of duodenum
Q41.1 Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of jejunum
     Includes:
    Apple peel syndrome
   Imperforate jejunum
Q41.2 Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of ileum
Q41.8 Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of other specified parts of small intestine
Q41.9 Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of small intestine, part unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of intestine NOS
Q42
Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of large intestine
Includes:
congenital obstruction, occlusion and stricture of large intestine
Q42.0 Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of rectum with fistula
Q42.1 Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of rectum without fistula
     Includes:
    Imperforate rectum
Q42.2 Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of anus with fistula
Q42.3 Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of anus without fistula
     Includes:
    Imperforate anus
Q42.8 Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of other parts of large intestine
Q42.9 Congenital absence, atresia and stenosis of large intestine, part unspecified
Q43
Other congenital malformations of intestine
Q43.0 Meckel's diverticulum
     Includes:
    Persistent:
   •
    omphalomesenteric duct
   •
    vitelline duct
Q43.1 Hirschsprung's disease
     Includes:
    Aganglionosis
   Congenital (aganglionic) megacolon
Q43.2 Other congenital functional disorders of colon
     Includes:
    Congenital dilatation of colon
Q43.3 Congenital malformations of intestinal fixation
     Includes:
    Congenital adhesions [bands]:
   •
    omental, anomalous
   •
    peritoneal
   Jackson's membrane
  Malrotation of colon
 Rotation:
•
 failure of
•
 incomplete
of caecum and colon
•
 insufficient
Universal mesentery
Q43.4 Duplication of intestine
Q43.5 Ectopic anus
706
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q43.6
Congenital fistula of rectum and anus
Excludes:
congenital fistula:
•
rectovaginal (Q52.2)
•
urethrorectal (Q64.70)
pilonidal fistula or sinus (L05.-)
with absence, atresia and stenosis (Q42.0, Q42.2)
Q43.7 Persistent cloaca
     Includes:
    Cloaca NOS
Q43.8 Other specified congenital malformations of intestine
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    blind loop syndrome
   •
    diverticulitis, colon
   •
    diverticulum, intestine
   Dolichocolon
  Megaloappendix
 Megaloduodenum
Microcolon
Transposition of:
•
 appendix
•
 colon
•
 intestine
Q43.9 
Q44.7
Congenital malformation of intestine, unspecified
Q44
Congenital malformations of gallbladder, bile ducts and liver
Q44.0 Agenesis, aplasia and hypoplasia of gallbladder
     Includes:
    Congenital absence of gallbladder
Q44.1 Other congenital malformations of gallbladder
     Includes:
    Congenital malformation of gallbladder NOS
   Intrahepatic gallbladder
Q44.2 Atresia of bile ducts
Q44.3 Congenital stenosis and stricture of bile ducts
Q44.4 Choledochal cyst
Q44.5 Other congenital malformations of bile ducts
     Includes:
    Accessory hepatic duct
   Congenital malformation of bile duct NOS
  Duplication:
 •
  biliary duct
 •
  cystic duct
Q44.6 Cystic disease of liver
     Includes:
    Fibrocystic disease of liver
Q44.7 Other congenital malformations of liver
     Includes:
    Accessory liver
   Alagille's syndrome
  Congenital:
 •
  absence of liver
 •
  hepatomegaly
 •
  malformation of liver NOS
707
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q45
Other congenital malformations of digestive system
Excludes:
Q45
congenital:
•
diaphragmatic hernia (Q79.0)
•
hiatus hernia (Q40.1)
Q45.0 Agenesis, aplasia and hypoplasia of pancreas
     Includes:
    Congenital absence of pancreas
Q45.1 Annular pancreas
Q45.2 Congenital pancreatic cyst
Q45.3 Other congenital malformations of pancreas and pancreatic duct
     Includes:
    Accessory pancreas
   Congenital malformation of pancreas or pancreatic duct NOS
  Excludes:
 diabetes mellitus:
•
 congenital (E13.-)
•
 neonatal (P70.2)
fibrocystic disease of pancreas (E84.-)
Q45.8 Other specified congenital malformations of digestive system
     Includes:
    Absence (complete)(partial) of alimentary tract NOS
Duplication
Malposition, congenital
Q45.9
of digestive organs NOS
Congenital malformation of digestive system, unspecified
Includes:
Congenital:
•
anomaly
NOS of digestive system
•
deformity
Congenital malformations of genital organs
(Q50-Q56)
Excludes:
androgen resistance
testicular feminization
syndrome (E34.5)
syndromes associated with anomalies in the number and form of chromosomes (Q90-Q99)
Q50
Congenital malformations of ovaries, fallopian tubes and broad ligaments
Q50.0 Congenital absence of ovary
     Excludes:
    Turner's syndrome (Q96.-)
Q50.1 Developmental ovarian cyst
Q50.2 Congenital torsion of ovary
Q50.3 Other congenital malformations of ovary
     Excludes:
    Ovotestis (Q56.0)
Q50.30o Accessory ovary
Q50.31o Ovarian streak
Q50.38o Other congenital malformations of ovary
Q50.4 Embryonic cyst of fallopian tube
     Includes:
    Fimbrial cyst
708
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q50.5
Q50.6
Q51
Embryonic cyst of broad ligament
Includes:
Cyst:
•
epoophoron
•
Gartner's duct
•
parovarian
Q52.7
Other congenital malformations of fallopian tube and broad ligament
Includes:
Absence
Accessory
(of) fallopian tube or broad ligament
Atresia
Congenital malformation of fallopian tube or broad ligament NOS
Congenital malformations of uterus and cervix
Q51.0 Agenesis and aplasia of uterus
     Includes:
    Congenital absence of uterus
Q51.1 Doubling of uterus with doubling of cervix and vagina
Q51.2 Other doubling of uterus
     Includes:
    Doubling of uterus NOS
Q51.3 Bicornate uterus
Q51.4 Unicornate uterus
Q51.5 Agenesis and aplasia of cervix
     Includes:
    Congenital absence of cervix
Q51.6 Embryonic cyst of cervix
Q51.7 Congenital fistulae between uterus and digestive and urinary tracts
Q51.8 Other congenital malformations of uterus and cervix
     Includes:
    Hypoplasia of uterus and cervix
Q51.9 Congenital malformation of uterus and cervix, unspecified
Q52
Other congenital malformations of female genitalia
Q52.0 Congenital absence of vagina
Q52.1 Doubling of vagina
     Includes:
    Septate vagina
   Excludes:
  doubling of vagina with doubling of uterus and cervix (Q51.1)
Q52.2 Congenital rectovaginal fistula
     Excludes:
    cloaca (Q43.7)
Q52.3 Imperforate hymen
Q52.4 Other congenital malformations of vagina
     Includes:
    Congenital malformation of vagina NOS
   Cyst:
  •
   canal of Nuck, congenital
  •
   embryonic vaginal
Q52.5 Fusion of labia
Q52.6 Congenital malformation of clitoris
Q52.7 Other congenital malformations of vulva
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    absence
   •
    cyst
   of vulva
  •
   malformation NOS
709
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q52.8 
Q52.8
Other specified congenital malformations of female genitalia
Q52.9 Congenital malformation of female genitalia, unspecified
Q53
Undescended testicle
Q53.0 Ectopic testis
     Includes:
    Unilateral or bilateral ectopic testes
Q53.1 Undescended testicle, unilateral
Q53.2 Undescended testicle, bilateral
Q53.9 Undescended testicle, unspecified
     Includes:
    Cryptorchism NOS
Q54
Hypospadias
Excludes:
epispadias (Q64.0)
Q54.0 Hypospadias, balanic
     Includes:
    Hypospadias:
   •
    coronal
   •
    glandular
Q54.1 Hypospadias, penile
Q54.2 Hypospadias, penoscrotal
Q54.3 Hypospadias, perineal
Q54.4 Congenital chordee
Q54.8 Other hypospadias
Q54.9 Hypospadias, unspecified
Q55
Other congenital malformations of male genital organs
Excludes:
congenital hydrocele (P83.5)
hypospadias (Q54.-)
Q55.0 Absence and aplasia of testis
     Includes:
    Monorchism
Q55.1 Hypoplasia of testis and scrotum
     Includes:
    Fusion of testes
Q55.2 Other congenital malformations of testis and scrotum
     Includes:
    Congenital malformation of testis or scrotum NOS
   Polyorchism
  Retractile testis
 Scrotal raphe anomaly
Testis migrans
Q55.3 Atresia of vas deferens
Q55.4 Other congenital malformations of vas deferens, epididymis, seminal vesicles and prostate
     Includes:
    Absence or aplasia of:
   •
    prostate
   •
    spermatic cord
   Congenital:
  •
   malformation of vas deferens, epididymis, seminal vesicles or prostate NOS
  •
   vasocutaneous fistula
Q55.5 Congenital absence and aplasia of penis
Q55.6 Other congenital malformations of penis
Q55.60o Hypoplasia of penis
       Includes:
      Micropenis
710
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q55.68o
Other congenital malformations of penis
Includes:
Congenital malformation of penis NOS
Curvature of penis (lateral)
Q55.8 Other specified congenital malformations of male genital organs
Q55.9 
Q61.1
Congenital malformation of male genital organ, unspecified
Includes:
Congenital
•
 anomaly
NOS of male genital organ
•
 deformity
Q56
Indeterminate sex and pseudohermaphroditism
Excludes:
pseudohermaphroditism:
•
female, with adrenocortical disorder (E25.-)
•
male, with androgen resistance (E34.5)
•
with specified chromosomal anomaly (Q96-Q99)
Q56.0 Hermaphroditism, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Ovotestis
Q56.1 Male pseudohermaphroditism, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Male pseudohermaphroditism NOS
Q56.2 Female pseudohermaphroditism, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Female pseudohermaphroditism NOS
Q56.3 Pseudohermaphroditism, unspecified
Q56.4 Indeterminate sex, unspecified
     Includes:
    Ambiguous genitalia
Congenital malformations of the urinary system
(Q60-Q64)
Q60
Renal agenesis and other reduction defects of kidney
Includes:
atrophy of kidney:
•
congenital
•
infantile
congenital absence of kidney
Q60.0 Renal agenesis, unilateral
Q60.1 Renal agenesis, bilateral
Q60.2 Renal agenesis, unspecified
Q60.3 Renal hypoplasia, unilateral
Q60.4 Renal hypoplasia, bilateral
Q60.5 Renal hypoplasia, unspecified
Q60.6 Potter's syndrome
     Excludes:
    oligohydraminios Potter's facies and normal kidneys (Q67.1)
Q61
Cystic kidney disease
Excludes:
acquired cyst of kidney (N28.1)
Potter's syndrome (Q60.6)
Q61.0 Congenital single renal cyst
     Includes:
    Cyst of kidney (congenital)(single)
Q61.1 Polycystic kidney, autosomal recessive
     Includes:
    Polycystic kidney, infantile type
711
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q61.2 
Q61.2
Polycystic kidney, autosomal dominant
Includes:
Polycystic kidney, adult type
Q61.3 Polycystic kidney, unspecified
Q61.4 Renal dysplasia
     Includes:
    Multicystic dyplastic kidney
   Multicystic kidney (developmental)
  Multicystic kidney disease
 Multicystic renal dysplasia
Excludes:
Polycystic kidney disease (Q61.1-Q61.3)
Q61.5 Medullary cystic kidney
     Includes:
    Sponge kidney NOS
Q61.8 Other cystic kidney diseases
     Includes:
    Fibrocystic:
   •
    kidney
   •
    renal degeneration or disease
Q61.9 Cystic kidney disease, unspecified
     Includes:
    Meckel-Gruber syndrome
Q62
Congenital obstructive defects of renal pelvis and congenital malformations
of ureter
Q62.0 Congenital hydronephrosis
Q62.1 Atresia and stenosis of ureter
Q62.10o Atresia and stenosis of ureteropelvic junction
       Includes:
      Congenital occlusion of ureteropelvic junction
Q62.11o Atresia and stenosis of ureterovesical orifice
       Includes:
      Congenital occlusion of ureterovesical orifice
Q62.18o Other atresia and stenosis of ureter
       Includes:
      Congenital occlusion of ureter
     Impervious ureter
Q62.2 Congenital megaloureter
     Includes:
    Congenital dilatation of ureter
Q62.3 Other obstructive defects of renal pelvis and ureter
     Includes:
    Congenital ureterocele
Q62.4 Agenesis of ureter
     Includes:
    Absent ureter
Q62.5 Duplication of ureter
     Includes:
    Accessory ureter
   Double ureter
Q62.6 Malposition of ureter
     Includes:
    Deviation
   Displacement
  Ectopic
 Implantation, anomalous
(of) ureter or ureteric orifice
Q62.7 Congenital vesico-uretero-renal reflux
Q62.8 Other congenital malformations of ureter
     Includes:
    Anomaly of ureter NOS
712
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q63
Other congenital malformations of kidney
Excludes:
congenital nephrotic syndrome (N04.-)
Q63.0 Q63.1 Lobulated, fused and horseshoe kidney
Q63.2 Ectopic kidney
     Includes:
    Congenital displaced kidney
   Malrotation of kidney
Q63.3 Hyperplastic and giant kidney
Q63.8 Other specified congenital malformations of kidney
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    megacalycosis
   •
    renal:
   •
    calculi
   •
    pelviectasis
   Excludes:
  that with congenital hydronephrosis (Q62.0)
Q63.9 
Q64.71o
Accessory kidney
Congenital malformation of kidney, unspecified
Q64
Other congenital malformations of urinary system
Q64.0 Epispadias
     Excludes:
    hypospadias (Q54.-)
Q64.1 Exstrophy of urinary bladder
Q64.10o Cloacal exstrophy of urinary bladder
Q64.18o Other exstrophy of urinary bladder
       Includes:
      Ectopica vesicae
     Exstrophy of bladder NOS
    Extroversion of bladder
Q64.2 Congenital posterior urethral valves
Q64.3 Other atresia and stenosis of urethra and bladder neck
Q64.30o Congenital bladder neck obstruction
       Includes:
      Urethrovesical obstruction (stricture)
Q64.31o Congenital stricture of urethra
Q64.32o Congenital stricture of urinary meatus
Q64.38o Other congenital atresia and stenosis of urethra and bladder neck
       Includes:
      Impervious urethra
Q64.4 Malformation of urachus
     Includes:
    Cyst
   Prolapse
of urachus
Patent urachus
Q64.5 Congenital absence of bladder and urethra
Q64.6 Congenital diverticulum of bladder
Q64.7 Other congenital malformations of bladder and urethra
Q64.70o Congenital urethrorectal fistula
Q64.71o Congenital double urethra (or urinary meatus)
713
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q64.78o Other congenital malformations of bladder and urethra
       Includes:
      Accessory:
     •
      bladder
     •
      urethra
     Congenital:
    •
     hernia of bladder
    •
     malformation of bladder or urethra NOS
    Prolapse of:
   •
    bladder (mucosa)
   •
    urethra
   •
    urinary meatus
Q64.8 Other specified congenital malformations of urinary system
Q64.9 Congenital malformation of urinary system, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital
   •
    anomaly
   NOS of urinary system
  •
   deformity
Q64.78o
714
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Congenital malformations and deformations of the
musculoskeletal system
(Q65-Q79)
Q65
Q66.8
Congenital deformities of hip
Excludes:
clicking hip (R29.4)
Q65.0 Congenital dislocation of hip, unilateral
Q65.1 Congenital dislocation of hip, bilateral
Q65.2 Congenital dislocation of hip, unspecified
Q65.3 Congenital subluxation of hip, unilateral
Q65.4 Congenital subluxation of hip, bilateral
Q65.5 Congenital subluxation of hip, unspecified
Q65.6 Unstable hip
     Includes:
    Dislocatable hip
   Subluxatable hip
Q65.8 Other congenital deformities of hip
     Includes:
    Anteversion of femoral neck
   Congenital:
  •
   acetabular dysplasia
  •
   coxa:
  •
   valga
  •
   vara
Q65.9 Congenital deformity of hip, unspecified
Q66
Congenital deformities of feet
Excludes:
reduction defects of feet (Q72.-)
valgus deformities (acquired) (M21.0)
varus deformities (acquired) (M21.1)
Q66.0 Talipes equinovarus
Q66.1 Talipes calcaneovarus
Q66.2 Metatarsus varus
Q66.3 Other congenital varus deformities of feet
     Includes:
    Hallux varus, congenital
Q66.4 Talipes calcaneovalgus
Q66.5 Congenital pes planus
     Includes:
    Flat foot:
   •
    congenital
   •
    rigid
   •
    spastic (everted)
Q66.6 Other congenital valgus deformities of feet
     Includes:
    Metatarsus valgus
Q66.7 Pes cavus
Q66.8 Other congenital deformities of feet
     Includes:
    Clubfoot NOS
   Hammer toe, congenital
  Talipes:
 •
  NOS
 •
  asymmetric
 Tarsal coalition
Vertical talus
715
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q66.9
Q66.9
Q67
Congenital deformity of feet, unspecified
Congenital musculoskeletal deformities of head, face, spine and chest
Excludes:
congenital malformation syndromes classified to Q87.-
Potter's syndrome (Q60.6)
Q67.0 Facial asymmetry
Q67.1 Compression facies
     Includes:
    Potter's facies (associated with oligohydramnios and normal kidneys)
Q67.2 Dolichocephaly
Q67.3 Plagiocephaly
Q67.4 Other congenital deformities of skull, face and jaw
     Includes:
    Depressions in skull
   Deviation of nasal septum, congenital
  Hemifacial atrophy or hypertrophy
 Squashed or bent nose, congenital
Excludes:
dentofacial anomalies [including malocclusion] (K07.-)
syphilitic saddle nose (A50.5)
Q67.5 Congenital deformity of spine
     Includes:
    Congenital scoliosis:
   •
    NOS
   •
    postural
   Excludes:
  infantile idiopathic scoliosis (M41.0 )
 scoliosis due to congenital bony malformation (Q76.3)
Q67.6 Pectus excavatum
     Includes:
    Congenital funnel chest
Q67.7 Pectus carinatum
     Includes:
    Congenital pigeon chest
Q67.8 Other congenital deformities of chest
     Includes:
    Congenital deformity of chest wall NOS
Q68
Other congenital musculoskeletal deformities
Excludes:
reduction defects of limb(s) (Q71-Q73)
Q68.0 Congenital deformity of sternocleidomastoid muscle
     Includes:
    Congenital (sternomastoid) torticollis
   Contracture of sternocleidomastoid (muscle)
  Sternomastoid tumour (congenital)
Q68.1 Congenital deformity of hand
     Includes:
    Congenital clubfinger
   Spade-like hand (congenital)
Q68.2 Congenital deformity of knee
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    dislocation of knee
   •
    genu recurvatum
Q68.3 Congenital bowing of femur
     Excludes:
    anteversion of femur (neck) (Q65.8)
Q68.4 Congenital bowing of tibia and fibula
Q68.5 Congenital bowing of long bones of leg, unspecified
716
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q68.8
Q69
Other specified congenital musculoskeletal deformities
Includes:
Congenital:
•
deformity of:
•
clavicle
•
elbow
•
forearm
•
scapula
•
dislocation of:
•
elbow
•
shoulder
Q72.1
Polydactyly
Q69.0 Accessory finger(s)
Q69.1 Accessory thumb(s)
Q69.2 Accessory toe(s)
     Includes:
    Accessory hallux
Q69.9 Polydactyly, unspecified
     Includes:
    Supernumerary digit(s) NOS
Q70
Syndactyly
Q70.0 Fused fingers
     Includes:
    Complex syndactyly of fingers with synostosis
Q70.1 Webbed fingers
     Includes:
    Simple syndactyly of fingers without synostosis
Q70.2 Fused toes
     Includes:
    Complex syndactyly of toes with synostosis
Q70.3 Webbed toes
     Includes:
    Simple syndactyly of toes without synostosis
Q70.4 Polysyndactyly
Q70.9 Syndactyly, unspecified
     Includes:
    Symphalangy NOS
Q71
Reduction defects of upper limb
Q71.0 Congenital complete absence of upper limb(s)
Q71.1 Congenital absence of upper arm and forearm with hand present
Q71.2 Congenital absence of both forearm and hand
Q71.3 Congenital absence of hand and finger(s)
Q71.4 Longitudinal reduction defect of radius
     Includes:
    Clubhand (congenital)
   Radial clubhand
Q71.5 Longitudinal reduction defect of ulna
Q71.6 Lobster-claw hand
Q71.8 Other reduction defects of upper limb(s)
     Includes:
    Congenital shortening of upper limb(s)
Q71.9 Reduction defect of upper limb, unspecified
Q72
Reduction defects of lower limb
Q72.0 Congenital complete absence of lower limb(s)
Q72.1 Congenital absence of thigh and lower leg with foot present
717
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q72.2 
Q72.2
Congenital absence of both lower leg and foot
Q72.3 Congenital absence of foot and toe(s)
Q72.4 Longitudinal reduction defect of femur
     Includes:
    Proximal femoral focal deficiency
Q72.5 Longitudinal reduction defect of tibia
Q72.6 Longitudinal reduction defect of fibula
Q72.7 Split foot
Q72.8 Other reduction defects of lower limb(s)
     Includes:
    Congenital shortening of lower limb(s)
Q72.9 Reduction defect of lower limb, unspecified
Q73
Reduction defects of unspecified limb
Q73.0 Congenital absence of unspecified limb(s)
     Includes:
    Amelia NOS
Q73.1 Phocomelia, unspecified limb(s)
     Includes:
    Phocomelia NOS
Q73.8 Other reduction defects of unspecified limb(s)
     Includes:
    Ectromelia NOS
   Hemimelia NOS
  of limb(s) NOS
 Reduction defect
Longitudinal reduction deformity of unspecified limb(s)
Q74
Other congenital malformations of limb(s)
Excludes:
polydactyly (Q69.-)
reduction defect of limb (Q71-Q73)
syndactyly (Q70.-)
Q74.0 Other congenital malformations of upper limb(s), including shoulder girdle
     Includes:
    Accessory carpal bones
   Cleidocranial dysostosis
  Congenital pseudarthrosis of clavicle
 Macrodactylia (fingers)
Madelung's deformity
Radioulnar synostosis
Sprengel's deformity
Triphalangeal thumb
Q74.1 Congenital malformation of knee
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   absence
  dislocation
Excludes:
718
of patella
Genu:
•
valgum
•
varum
Rudimentary patella
congenital:
•
dislocation of knee (Q68.2)
•
genu recurvatum (Q68.2)
nail patella syndrome (Q87.2)
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q74.2
Other congenital malformations of lower limb(s), including pelvic girdle
Includes:
Congenital:
•
fusion of sacroiliac joint
•
malformation (of):
•
ankle (joint)
•
sacroiliac (joint)
Excludes:
anteversion of femur (neck) (Q65.8)
Q74.3 Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita
Q74.8 Other specified congenital malformations of limb(s)
Q74.9 
Q76.0
Unspecified congenital malformation of limb(s)
Includes:
Congenital anomaly of limb(s) NOS
Q75
Other congenital malformations of skull and face bones
Excludes:
congenital malformation:
•
of face NOS (Q18.-)
•
syndromes classified to Q87.-
dentofacial anomalies [including malocclusion] (K07.-)
musculoskeletal deformities of head and face (Q67.0-Q67.4)
skull defects associated with congenital anomalies of brain such as:
•
anencephaly (Q00.0)
•
encephalocele (Q01.-)
•
hydrocephalus (Q03.-)
•
microcephaly (Q02)
Q75.0 Craniosynostosis
     Includes:
    Acrocephaly
   Imperfect fusion of skull
  Oxycephaly
 Premature closure of (cranial) sutures
Tower skull
Trigonocephaly
Q75.1 Craniofacial dysostosis
     Includes:
    Crouzon's disease
Q75.2 Hypertelorism
Q75.3 Macrocephaly
Q75.4 Mandibulofacial dysostosis
     Includes:
    Syndrome:
   •
    Franceschetti
   •
    Treacher Collins
Q75.5 Oculomandibular dysostosis
Q75.8 Other specified congenital malformations of skull and face bones
     Includes:
    Absence of skull bone, congenital
   Congenital deformity of forehead
  Platybasia
Q75.9 Congenital malformation of skull and face bones, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital anomaly of:
   •
    face bones NOS
   •
    skull NOS
Q76
Congenital malformations of spine and bony thorax
Excludes:
Q76.0
congenital musculoskeletal deformities of spine and chest (Q67.5-Q67.8)
Spina bifida occulta
Excludes:
meningocele (spinal) (Q05.-)
spina bifida (aperta)(cystica) (Q05.-)
719
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q76.1 
Q76.1
Klippel-Feil syndrome
Includes:
Cervical fusion syndrome
Q76.2 Congenital spondylolisthesis
Q76.20o Congenital spondylolisthesis
       Excludes:
      acquired spondylolisthesis (M43.1)
Q76.21o Congenital spondylolysis
       Excludes:
      acquired spondylolysis (M43.0)
Q76.3 Congenital scoliosis due to congenital bony malformation
     Includes:
    Hemivertebra fusion or failure of segmentation with scoliosis
Q76.4 Other congenital malformations of spine, not associated with scoliosis
     Includes:
    Congenital:
•
absence of vertebra
•
fusion of spine
•
kyphosis
•
lordosis
•
malformation of lumbosacral (joint) (region)
Hemivertebra
Malformation of spine
Platyspondylisis
Supernumerary vertebra
Q76.5 Cervical rib
     Includes:
    Supernumerary rib in cervical region
Q76.6 Other congenital malformations of ribs
     Includes:
    Accessory rib
   Congenital:
  •
   absence of rib
  •
   fusion of ribs
  •
   malformation of ribs NOS
  Excludes:
 short rib syndrome (Q77.2)
Q76.7 Congenital malformation of sternum
     Includes:
    Congenital absence of sternum
   Sternum bifidum
Q76.8 Other congenital malformations of bony thorax
Q76.9 
unspecified or not associated with scoliosis
Congenital malformation of bony thorax, unspecified
Q77
Osteochondrodysplasia with defects of growth of tubular bones and spine
Excludes:
mucopolysaccharidosis (E76.0-E76.3)
Q77.0 Achondrogenesis
     Includes:
    Hypochondrogenesis
Q77.1 Thanatophoric short stature
     Includes:
    Thanatophoric dysplasia
Q77.2 Short rib syndrome
     Includes:
    Asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia [Jeune]
Q77.3 Chondrodysplasia punctata
Q77.4 Achondroplasia
     Includes:
    Hypochondroplasia
   Osteosclerosis congenita
Q77.5 Dystrophic dysplasia
720
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q77.6 Chondroectodermal dysplasia
     Includes:
    Ellis-van Creveld syndrome
Q77.7 Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
Q77.8 Other osteochondrodysplasia with defects of growth of tubular bones and spine
Q77.9 Osteochondrodysplasia with defects of growth of tubular bones and spine, unspecified
Q78
Q79.6
Other osteochondrodysplasias
Q78.0 Osteogenesis imperfecta
     Includes:
    Fragilitas ossium
   Osteopsathyrosis
Q78.1 Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia
     Includes:
    Albright(-McCune)(-Sternberg) syndrome
Q78.2 Osteopetrosis
     Includes:
    Albers-Schönberg syndrome
Q78.3 Progressive diaphyseal dysplasia
     Includes:
    Camurati-Engelmann syndrome
Q78.4 Enchondromatosis
     Includes:
    Maffucci's syndrome
   Ollier's disease
Q78.5 Metaphyseal dysplasia
     Includes:
    Pyle's syndrome
Q78.6 Multiple congenital exostoses
     Includes:
    Diaphyseal aclasis
Q78.8 Other specified osteochondrodysplasias
     Includes:
    Osteopoikilosis
Q78.9 Osteochondrodysplasia, unspecified
     Includes:
    Chondrodystrophy NOS
   Osteodystrophy NOS
Q79
Congenital malformations of the musculoskeletal system, not elsewhere
classified
Excludes:
congenital (sternomastoid) torticollis (Q68.0)
Q79.0 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
     Excludes:
    congenital hiatus hernia (Q40.1)
Q79.1 Other congenital malformations of diaphragm
     Includes:
    Absence
   of diaphragm
  Eventration
Congenital malformation of diaphragm NOS
Q79.2 Exomphalos
     Includes:
    Omphalocele
   Excludes:
  umbilical hernia (K42.-)
Q79.3 Gastroschisis
Q79.4 Prune belly syndrome
Q79.5 Other congenital malformations of abdominal wall
     Excludes:
    umbilical hernia (K42.-)
Q79.6 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
721
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q79.8 Other congenital malformations of musculoskeletal system
     Includes:
    Absence of:
   •
    muscle
   •
    tendon
   Accessory muscle
  Amyotrophia congenita
 Congenital:
•
 constricting bands
•
 shortening of tendon
Poland's syndrome
Q79.9 Congenital malformation of musculoskeletal system, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    anomaly
   NOS of musculoskeletal system NOS
  •
   deformity
Q79.8
722
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Other congenital malformations
(Q80-Q89)
Q80
Q82.4
Congenital ichthyosis
Excludes:
Refsum's disease (G60.1)
Q80.0 Ichthyosis vulgaris
Q80.1 X-linked ichthyosis
Q80.2 Lamellar ichthyosis
     Includes:
    Collodion baby
Q80.3 Congenital bullous ichthyosiform erythroderma
Q80.4 Harlequin fetus
Q80.8 Other congenital ichthyosis
Q80.9 Congenital ichthyosis, unspecified
Q81
Epidermolysis bullosa
Q81.0 Epidermolysis bullosa simplex
     Excludes:
    Cockayne's syndrome (Q87.1)
Q81.1 Epidermolysis bullosa letalis
     Includes:
    Herlitz' syndrome
Q81.2 Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica
Q81.8 Other epidermolysis bullosa
Q81.9 Epidermolysis bullosa, unspecified
Q82
Other congenital malformations of skin
Excludes:
acrodermatitis enteropathica (E83.2)
congenital erythropoietic porphyria (E80.0)
pilonidal cyst or sinus (L05.-)
Sturge-Weber(-Dimitri) syndrome (Q85.8)
Q82.0 Hereditary lymphoedema
Q82.1 Xeroderma pigmentosum
Q82.2 Mastocytosis
     Includes:
    Urticaria pigmentosa
   Excludes:
  malignant mastocytosis (C96.2)
Q82.3 Incontinentia pigmenti
Q82.4 Ectodermal dysplasia (anhidrotic)
     Excludes:
    Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (Q77.6)
723
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q82.5 Congenital non-neoplastic naevus
     Includes:
    Birthmark NOS
   Naevus:
  •
   flammeus
  •
   portwine
  •
   sanguineous
  •
   strawberry
  •
   vascular NOS
  •
   verrucous
  Excludes:
 café au lait spots (L81.3)
 lentigo (L81.4)
naevus:
•
 NOS (D22.-)
•
 araneus (I78.1)
•
 melanocytic (D22.-)
•
 pigmented (D22.-)
•
 spider (I78.1)
•
 stellar (I78.1)
Q82.8 Other specified congenital malformations of skin
     Includes:
    Abnormal palmar creases
   Accessory skin tags
  Benign familial pemphigus [Hailey-Hailey]
 Cutis laxa (hyperelastica)
Dermatoglyphic anomalies
Inherited keratosis palmaris et plantaris
Keratosis follicularis [Darier-White]
Excludes:
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (Q79.6)
Q82.9 Congenital malformation of skin, unspecified
Q82.5
Q83
Congenital malformations of breast
Excludes:
absence of pectoral muscle (Q79.8)
Q83.0 Congenital absence of breast with absent nipple
     Excludes:
    Poland's syndrome (Q79.8)
Q83.1 Accessory breast
     Includes:
    Supernumerary breast
Q83.2 Absent nipple
Q83.3 Accessory nipple
     Includes:
    Supernumerary nipple
Q83.8 Other congenital malformations of breast
     Includes:
    Hypoplasia of breast
Q83.9 Congenital malformation of breast, unspecified
Q84
Other congenital malformations of integument
Q84.0 Congenital alopecia
     Includes:
    Congenital atrichosis
Q84.1 Congenital morphological disturbances of hair, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Beaded hair
   Monilethrix
  Pili annulati
 Excludes:
Menkes' kinky hair syndrome (E83.0)
724
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q84.2
Other congenital malformations of hair
Includes:
Congenital:
•
hypertrichosis
•
malformation of hair NOS
Persistent lanugo
Q84.3 Anonychia
     Excludes:
    nail patella syndrome (Q87.2)
Q84.4 Congenital leukonychia
Q84.5 Enlarged and hypertrophic nails
     Includes:
    Congenital onychauxis
   Pachyonychia
Q84.6 Other congenital malformations of nails
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    clubnail
   •
    koilonychia
   •
    malformation of nail NOS
Q84.8 Other specified congenital malformations of integument
     Includes:
    Aplasia cutis congenita
Q84.9 
Q86.8
Congenital malformation of integument, unspecified
Includes:
Congenital:
•
 anomaly
NOS of integument NOS
•
 deformity
Q85
Phakomatoses, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
ataxia telangiectasia [Louis-Bar] (G11.3)
familial dysautonomia [Riley-Day] (G90.1)
Q85.0 Neurofibromatosis (nonmalignant)
     Includes:
    Von Recklinghausen's disease
Q85.1 Tuberous sclerosis
     Includes:
    Bourneville's disease
   Epiloia
Q85.8 Other phakomatoses, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Syndrome:
   •
    Peutz-Jeghers
   •
    Sturge-Weber(-Dimitri)
   •
    von Hippel-Lindau
   Excludes:
  Meckel-Gruber syndrome (Q61.9)
Q85.9 Phakomatosis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Hamartosis NOS
Q86
Congenital malformation syndromes due to known exogenous causes, not
elsewhere classified
Excludes:
iodine-deficiency-related hypothyroidism (E00-E02)
nonteratogenic effects of substances transmitted via placenta or breast milk (P04.-)
Q86.0 Fetal alcohol syndrome (dysmorphic)
Q86.1 Fetal hydantoin syndrome
     Includes:
    Meadow's syndrome
Q86.2 Dysmorphism due to warfarin
Q86.8 Other congenital malformation syndromes due to known exogenous causes
725
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q87
Q87
Other specified congenital malformation syndromes affecting multiple
systems
Q87.0 Congenital malformation syndromes predominantly affecting facial appearance
     Includes:
    Acrocephalopolysyndactyly
   Acrocephalosyndactyly [Apert]
  Coffin-Lowry syndrome
 Cryptophthalmos syndrome
Cyclopia
Syndrome:
•
 Goldenhar
•
 Moebius
•
 oro-facial-digital
•
 Robin
Whistling face
Williams-(Beuren) syndrome
Q87.1 Congenital malformation syndromes predominantly associated with short stature
     Includes:
    Syndrome:
   •
    Aarskog
   •
    Cockayne
   •
    De Lange
   •
    Dubowitz
   •
    Noonan
   •
    Prader-Willi
   •
    Robinow-Silverman-Smith
   •
    Russell-Silver
   •
    Seckel
   •
    Smith-Lemli-Opitz
   •
    Tricho-rhino-phalangeal (TRP)
   Excludes:
  Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (Q77.6)
Q87.2 Congenital malformation syndromes predominantly involving limbs
     Includes:
    Syndrome:
   •
    Holt-Oram
   •
    Klippel-Trénaunay-Weber
    •
     nail patella
    •
     Rubinstein-Taybi
    •
     sirenomelia
    •
     thrombocytopenia with absent radius [TAR]
    •
     VACTEL
    •
     VACTERL
    •
     VATER
Q87.3 Congenital malformation syndromes involving early overgrowth
     Includes:
    Syndrome:
   •
    Beckwith-Wiedemann
   •
    Marshall-Smith
   •
    Simpson-Golabi-Behmel
   •
    Sotos
   •
    Weaver
Q87.4 Marfan's syndrome
Q87.5 Other congenital malformation syndromes with other skeletal changes
Q87.8 Other specified congenital malformation syndromes, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    CHARGE association
   Syndrome:
  •
   Alport
  •
   Laurence-Moon(-Bardet)-Biedl
  •
   Zellweger
726
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q89
Other congenital malformations, not elsewhere classified
Q89.0 Q89.1 Congenital malformations of adrenal gland
           Excludes:
          congenital adrenal hyperplasia (E25.0)
Q89.2 Congenital malformations of other endocrine glands
     Includes:
    Congenital malformation of parathyroid or thyroid gland
   Persistent thyroglossal duct
  Thyroglossal cyst
Q89.3 Situs inversus
     Includes:
    Dextrocardia
   Mirror-image atrial arrangement
Q89.9
Congenital malformations of spleen
Includes:
Asplenia (congenital)
Congenital splenomegaly
Excludes:
isomerism of atrial appendages (with asplenia or polysplenia) (Q20.6)
Excludes:
with situs inversus
Kartagener syndrome
Situs inversus or transversus:
•
abdominalis
•
thoracis
Transposition of viscera:
•
abdominal
•
thoracic
dextrocardia NOS (Q24.0)
laevocardia (Q24.1)
Q89.4 Conjoined twins
     Includes:
    Craniopagus
   Dicephaly
  Double monster
 Pygopagus
Thoracopagus
Q89.7 Multiple congenital malformations, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Monster NOS
   Multiple congenital:
  •
   anomalies NOS
  •
   deformities NOS
  Excludes:
 congenital malformation syndromes affecting multiple systems (Q87.-)
Q89.8 Other specified congenital malformations
Q89.9 Congenital malformation, unspecified
     Includes:
    Congenital:
   •
    anomaly NOS
   •
    deformity NOS
727
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q90
Chromosomal abnormalities, not elsewhere classified
(Q90-Q99)
Q90
Down's syndrome
Q90.0 Trisomy 21, meiotic nondisjunction
Q90.1 Trisomy 21, mosaicism (mitotic nondisjunction)
Q90.2 Trisomy 21, translocation
Q90.9 Down's syndrome, unspecified
     Includes:
    Trisomy 21 NOS
Q91
Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome
Q91.0 Trisomy 18, meiotic nondisjunction
Q91.1 Trisomy 18, mosaicism (mitotic nondisjunction)
Q91.2 Trisomy 18, translocation
Q91.3 Edwards' syndrome, unspecified
Q91.4 Trisomy 13, meiotic nondisjunction
Q91.5 Trisomy 13, mosaicism (mitotic nondisjunction)
Q91.6 Trisomy 13, translocation
Q91.7 Patau's syndrome, unspecified
Q92
Other trisomies and partial trisomies of the autosomes, not elsewhere
classified
Includes:
Excludes:
unbalanced translocations and insertions
trisomies of chromosomes 13, 18, 21 (Q90-Q91)
Q92.0 Whole chromosome trisomy, meiotic nondisjunction
Q92.1 Whole chromosome trisomy, mosaicism (mitotic nondisjunction)
Q92.2 Major partial trisomy
     Includes:
    Whole arm or more duplicated.
Q92.3 Minor partial trisomy
     Includes:
    Less than whole arm duplicated.
Q92.4 Duplications seen only at prometaphase
Q92.5 Duplications with other complex rearrangements
Q92.6 Extra marker chromosomes
Q92.7 Triploidy and polyploidy
Q92.8 Other specified trisomies and partial trisomies of autosomes
Q92.9 Trisomy and partial trisomy of autosomes, unspecified
Q93
Monosomies and deletions from the autosomes, not elsewhere classified
Q93.0 Whole chromosome monosomy, meiotic nondisjunction
Q93.1 Whole chromosome monosomy, mosaicism (mitotic nondisjunction)
Q93.2 Chromosome replaced with ring or dicentric
Q93.3 Deletion of short arm of chromosome 4
     Includes:
    Wolff-Hirschorn syndrome
Q93.4 Deletion of short arm of chromosome 5
     Includes:
    Cri-du-chat syndrome
728
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS, DEFORMATIONS AND CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES (Q00-Q99)
Q93.5 Other deletions of part of a chromosome
     Includes:
    Angelman syndrome
Q93.6 Deletions seen only at prometaphase
Q93.7 Deletions with other complex rearrangements
Q93.8 Other deletions from the autosomes
Q93.9 Deletion from autosomes, unspecified
Q95
Q98.5
Balanced rearrangements and structural markers, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Robertsonian and balanced reciprocal translocations and insertions
Q95.0 Balanced translocation and insertion in normal individual
Q95.1 Chromosome inversion in normal individual
Q95.2 Balanced autosomal rearrangement in abnormal individual
Q95.3 Balanced sex/autosomal rearrangement in abnormal individual
Q95.4 Individuals with marker heterochromatin
Q95.5 Individuals with autosomal fragile site
Q95.8 Other balanced rearrangements and structural markers
Q95.9 Balanced rearrangement and structural marker, unspecified
Q96
Turner's syndrome
Excludes:
Noonan's syndrome (Q87.1)
Q96.0 Karyotype 45,X
Q96.1 Karyotype 46,X iso (Xq)
Q96.2 Karyotype 46,X with abnormal sex chromosome, except iso (Xq)
Q96.3 Mosaicism, 45,X/46,XX or XY
Q96.4 Mosaicism, 45,X/other cell line(s) with abnormal sex chromosome
Q96.8 Other variants of Turner's syndrome
Q96.9 Turner's syndrome, unspecified
Q97
Other sex chromosome abnormalities, female phenotype, not elsewhere
classified
Excludes:
Turner's syndrome (Q96.-)
Q97.0 Karyotype 47,XXX
Q97.1 Female with more than three X chromosomes
Q97.2 Mosaicism, lines with various numbers of X chromosomes
Q97.3 Female with 46,XY karyotype
Q97.8 Other specified sex chromosome abnormalities, female phenotype
Q97.9 Sex chromosome abnormality, female phenotype, unspecified
Q98
Other sex chromosome abnormalities, male phenotype, not elsewhere
classified
Q98.0 Klinefelter's syndrome karyotype 47,XXY
Q98.1 Klinefelter's syndrome, male with more than two X chromosomes
Q98.2 Klinefelter's syndrome, male with 46,XX karyotype
Q98.3 Other male with 46,XX karyotype
Q98.4 Klinefelter's syndrome, unspecified
Q98.5 Karyotype 47,XYY
729
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Q98.6 
Q98.6
Male with structurally abnormal sex chromosome
Q98.7 Male with sex chromosome mosaicism
Q98.8 Other specified sex chromosome abnormalities, male phenotype
Q98.9 Sex chromosome abnormality, male phenotype, unspecified
Q99
Other chromosome abnormalities, not elsewhere classified
Q99.0 Chimera 46,XX/46,XY
     Includes:
    Chimera 46,XX/46,XY true hermaphrodite
Q99.1 46,XX true hermaphrodite
     Includes:
    46,XX
   46,XY
with streak gonads
Pure gonadal dysgenesis
Q99.2 Fragile X chromosome
     Includes:
    Fragile X syndrome
Q99.8 Other specified chromosome abnormalities
     Includes:
    DNA microdeletion syndrome
   Mitochondrial:
  •
   (DNA) deletion
  •
   cytopathy
  Use additional code to identify any known manifestation
 •
  M.E.L.A.S. (G71.3)
 •
  MERRF(G40.4)
Q99.9 Chromosomal abnormality, unspecified
730
I
CHAPTER XVIII
Symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory
findings, not elsewhere classified
(R00-R99)
Note:
Excludes:
Signs and symptoms that point rather definitely to a given diagnosis have been assigned to a category in other
chapters of the classification. In general, categories in this chapter include the less well-defined conditions and
symptoms that, without the necessary study of the case to establish a final diagnosis, point perhaps equally to
two or more diseases or to two or more systems of the body. Practically all categories in the chapter could be
designated "not otherwise specified", "unknown etiology" or "transient". The Alphabetical Index should be
consulted to determine which symptoms and signs are to be allocated here and which to other chapters. The
residual subcategories, numbered .8, are generally provided for other relevant symptoms that cannot be
allocated elsewhere in the classification.
The conditions and signs or symptoms included in categories (R00-R99) consist of:
•
(a) cases for which no more specific diagnosis can be made even after all the facts bearing on the case have been
investigated;
•
(b) signs or symptoms existing at the time of initial encounter that proved to be transient and whose causes could
not be determined;
•
(c) provisional diagnoses in a patient who failed to return for further investigation or care;
•
(d) cases referred elsewhere for investigation or treatment before the diagnosis was made;
•
(e) cases in which a more precise diagnosis was not available for any other reason;
•
(f) certain symptoms, for which supplementary information is provided, that represent important problems in
medical care in their own right.
abnormal findings on antenatal screening of mother (O28.-)
certain conditions originating in the perinatal period (P00-P96)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
R00-R09
R10-R19
R20-R23
R25-R29
R30-R39
R40-R46
R47-R49
R50-R69
R70-R79
R80-R82
R83-R89
R90-R94
R95-R99
Symptoms and signs involving the circulatory and respiratory systems
Symptoms and signs involving the digestive system and abdomen
Symptoms and signs involving the skin and subcutaneous tissue
Symptoms and signs involving the nervous and musculoskeletal systems
Symptoms and signs involving the urinary system
Symptoms and signs involving cognition, perception, emotional state and behaviour
Symptoms and signs involving speech and voice
General symptoms and signs
Abnormal findings on examination of blood, without diagnosis
Abnormal findings on examination of urine, without diagnosis
Abnormal findings on examination of other body fluids, substances and tissues,
without diagnosis
Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging and in function studies, without diagnosis
Ill-defined and unknown causes of mortality
731
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R00
Symptoms and signs involving the circulatory and respiratory
systems
(R00-R09)
R00
Abnormalities of heart beat
Excludes:
abnormalities originating in the perinatal period (P29.18)
specified arrhythmias (I47-I49)
R00.0 Tachycardia, unspecified
     Includes:
    Rapid heart beat
   Tachycardia:
  •
   sinoauricular NOS
  •
   sinus [sinusal] NOS
R00.1 Bradycardia, unspecified
     Includes:
    Bradycardia:
   •
    sinoatrial
   •
    sinus
   •
    vagal
   Slow heart beat
  Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug-induced.
R00.2 Palpitations
     Includes:
    Awareness of heart beat
R00.8 Other and unspecified abnormalities of heart beat
R01
Cardiac murmurs and other cardiac sounds
Excludes:
those originating in the perinatal period (P29.8)
R01.0 Benign and innocent cardiac murmurs
     Includes:
    Functional cardiac murmur
R01.1 Cardiac murmur, unspecified
     Includes:
    Cardiac bruit NOS
R01.2 Other cardiac sounds
     Includes:
    Cardiac dullness, increased or decreased
   Precordial friction
R02
Gangrene, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
R03
gangrene in:
•
atherosclerosis (I70.2)
•
diabetes mellitus (E10-E14 with common fourth character .5)
•
of certain specified sites - see Alphabetical Index
•
other peripheral vascular diseases (I73.-)
gas gangrene (A48.0)
pyoderma gangrenosum (L88)
Abnormal blood-pressure reading, without diagnosis
R03.0 Elevated blood-pressure reading, without diagnosis of hypertension
     Note:
    This category is to be used to record an episode of elevated blood pressure in a patient in whom
   no formal diagnosis of hypertension has been made, or as an isolated incidental finding.
R03.1 Nonspecific low blood-pressure reading
     Excludes:
    hypotension (I95.-)
   maternal hypotension syndrome (O26.5-)
  neurogenic orthostatic hypotension (G90.3)
732
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
R04
R04.0
Haemorrhage from respiratory passages
Epistaxis
Includes:
R06.7
Haemorrhage from nose
Nosebleed
R04.1 Haemorrhage from throat
     Excludes:
    haemoptysis (R04.2)
R04.2 Haemoptysis
     Includes:
    Blood-stained sputum
   Cough with haemorrhage
R04.8 Haemorrhage from other sites in respiratory passages
     Includes:
    Pulmonary haemorrhage NOS
   Excludes:
  perinatal pulmonary haemorrhage (P26.-)
R04.9 Haemorrhage from respiratory passages, unspecified
R05
Cough
Excludes:
R06
Abnormalities of breathing
Excludes:
R06.0
Dyspnoea
Includes:
Excludes:
R06.1
cough with haemorrhage (R04.2)
psychogenic cough (F45.3)
Stridor
Excludes:
respiratory
•
arrest (R09.2)
•
distress:
•
in newborn (P22.-)
•
syndrome of adult (J80)
•
failure (J96.-):
•
of newborn (P28.5)
Orthopnoea
Shortness of breath
transient tachypnoea of newborn (P22.1)
congenital laryngeal stridor (P28.8)
laryngismus (stridulus) (J38.5)
R06.2 Wheezing
R06.3 Periodic breathing
     Includes:
    Cheyne-Stokes breathing
R06.4 Hyperventilation
     Excludes:
    psychogenic hyperventilation (F45.3)
R06.5 Mouth breathing
     Includes:
    Snoring
   Excludes:
  dry mouth NOS (R68.2)
R06.6 Hiccough
     Excludes:
R06.7
psychogenic hiccough (F45.3)
Sneezing
733
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R06.8
R06.8
R07
Other and unspecified abnormalities of breathing
Includes:
Apnoea NOS
Breath-holding (spells)
Choking sensation
Sighing
Excludes:
apnoea (of):
•
newborn (P28.4):
•
(primary) (P28.3)
•
sleep (G47.3-)
Pain in throat and chest
Excludes:
dysphagia (R13)
epidemic myalgia (B33.0)
pain in:
•
breast (N64.4)
•
neck (M54.2)
sore throat (acute) NOS (J02.9)
R07.0 Pain in throat
R07.1 Chest pain on breathing
     Includes:
    Painful respiration
R07.2 Precordial pain
     Includes:
    Retrosternal pain
R07.3 Other chest pain
     Includes:
    Anterior chest-wall pain NOS
   Atypical chest pain
  Musculoskeletal chest pain
R07.4 Chest pain, unspecified
R09
Other symptoms and signs involving the circulatory and respiratory systems
Excludes:
respiratory:
•
distress (syndrome)(of):
•
adult (J80)
•
newborn (P22.-)
•
failure (J96.-):
•
newborn (P28.5)
R09.0 Asphyxia, unspecified
     Excludes:
    asphyxia (due to):
   •
    birth (P21.-)
   •
    carbon monoxide (T58)
   •
    foreign body in respiratory tract (T17.-)
   •
    intrauterine (P20.-)
   •
    traumatic (T71)
R09.1 Pleurisy
     Excludes:
R09.2
734
pleurisy with effusion (J90)
Respiratory arrest
Includes:
Cardiorespiratory failure
Excludes:
cardiorespiratory arrest (I46.9)
respiratory failure (J96.9)
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
R09.3
Abnormal sputum
Includes:
Abnormal:
•
amount
•
colour
•
odour
Excessive
Excludes:
R09.8
R10.39o
(of) sputum
blood-stained sputum (R04.2)
Other specified symptoms and signs involving the circulatory and respiratory systems
Includes:
Bruit (arterial)
Chest:
•
abnormal percussion
•
friction sounds
•
tympany
Rales
Weak pulse
Symptoms and signs involving the digestive system and
abdomen
(R10-R19)
Excludes:
R10
gastrointestinal haemorrhage (K92.0-K92.2):
•
newborn (P54.0-P54.3)
intestinal obstruction (K56.-):
•
newborn (P76.-)
pylorospasm:
•
(K31.3)
•
congenital or infantile (Q40.0)
symptoms:
•
and signs involving the urinary system (R30-R39)
•
referable to genital organs:
•
female (N94.-)
•
male (N48-N50)
Abdominal and pelvic pain
Excludes:
dorsalgia (M54.-)
flatulence and related conditions (R14)
renal colic (N23)
R10.0 Acute abdomen
     Includes:
    Severe abdominal pain (generalized)(localized)(with abdominal rigidity)
R10.1 Pain localized to upper abdomen
R10.10o Right upper quadrant pain
R10.11o Left upper quadrant pain
R10.12o Epigastric pain
R10.19o Upper abdominal pain, unspecified
R10.2 Pelvic and perineal pain
R10.3 Pain localized to other parts of lower abdomen
R10.30o Right lower quadrant pain
R10.31o Left lower quadrant pain
R10.32o Periumbilical pain
R10.39o Lower abdominal pain, unspecified
735
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R10.4
R10.4
R11
Other and unspecified abdominal pain
Includes:
Abdominal tenderness NOS
Colic:
•
NOS
•
infantile
Nausea and vomiting
Excludes:
haematemesis (K92.0)
neonatal (P54.0)
vomiting (of):
•
excessive, in pregnancy (O21.-)
•
following gastrointestinal surgery (K91.0)
•
newborn (P92.0)
•
psychogenic (F50.5)
R11.0o Projectile vomiting
R11.1o Nausea alone
R11.2o Vomiting alone
R11.3o Nausea with vomiting
R12
Heartburn
Excludes:
R13
Dysphagia
Includes:
Excludes:
R13.0o
R13.2o
R13.8o
R14
Esophageal dysphagia
Includes:
Neurogenic
Obstructive
oropharyngeal dysphagia
esophageal dysphagia
Other and unspecified dysphagia
Flatulence and related conditions
Excludes:
Abdominal distension (gaseous)
Bloating
Eructation
Gas pain
Tympanites (abdominal)(intestinal)
psychogenic aerophagy (F45.3)
Faecal incontinence
Includes:
Excludes:
R16
Difficulty in swallowing
psychogenic dysphagia (F45.8)
Oropharyngeal dysphagia
Includes:
Neurogenic
Obstructive
Includes:
R15
dyspepsia (K30)
Encopresis NOS
that of nonorganic origin (F98.1)
Hepatomegaly and splenomegaly, not elsewhere classified
R16.0 Hepatomegaly, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Hepatomegaly NOS
R16.1 Splenomegaly, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Splenomegaly NOS
736
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
R16.2
R17
Hepatomegaly with splenomegaly, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Hepatosplenomegaly NOS
Excludes:
R18
neonatal jaundice (P55, P57-P59)
Ascites
Includes:
R19
R19.8
Unspecified jaundice
Fluid in peritoneal cavity
Other symptoms and signs involving the digestive system and abdomen
Excludes:
acute abdomen (R10.0)
R19.0 Intra-abdominal and pelvic swelling, mass and lump
     Includes:
    Diffuse or generalized swelling or mass:
   •
    intra-abdominal NOS
   •
    pelvic NOS
   •
    umbilical
   Excludes:
  abdominal distension (gaseous) (R14)
 ascites (R18)
R19.1 Abnormal bowel sounds
     Includes:
    Absent
   Hyperactive
bowel sounds
R19.2 Visible peristalsis
     Includes:
    Hyperperistalsis
R19.3 Abdominal rigidity
     Excludes:
    that with severe abdominal pain (R10.0)
R19.4 Change in bowel habit
     Excludes:
    constipation (K59.0)
   functional diarrhoea (K59.1)
R19.5 Other faecal abnormalities
R19.50o Positive fecal occult blood test
       Excludes:
      melaena (K92.1):
     •
      neonatal (P54.1)
R19.58o Other fecal abnormalities
       Includes:
      Abnormal stool colour
     Bulky stools
    Mucus in stools
R19.6 Halitosis
R19.8 Other specified symptoms and signs involving the digestive system and abdomen
737
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R20
Symptoms and signs involving the skin and subcutaneous
tissue
(R20-R23)
R20
Disturbances of skin sensation
Excludes:
dissociative anaesthesia and sensory loss (F44.6)
psychogenic disturbances (F45.8)
R20.0 Anaesthesia of skin
R20.1 Hypoaesthesia of skin
R20.2 Paraesthesia of skin
     Includes:
    Formication
   Pins and needles
  Tingling skin
 Excludes:
acroparaesthesia (I73.8)
R20.3 Hyperaesthesia
R20.8 Other and unspecified disturbances of skin sensation
R21 Rash and other nonspecific skin eruption
R22 Localized swelling, mass and lump of skin and subcutaneous tissue
Includes:
Excludes:
subcutaneous nodules (localized)(superficial)
abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging (R90-R93)
enlarged lymph nodes (R59.-)
localized adiposity (E65)
mass and lump:
•
breast (N63)
•
intra-abdominal or pelvic (R19.0)
•
umbilical (R19.0)
oedema (R60.-)
swelling (of):
•
intra-abdominal or pelvic (R19.0)
•
joint (M25.4)
•
scrotum (N50.8)
•
testis (N50.8)
R22.0 Localized swelling, mass and lump, head
R22.1 Localized swelling, mass and lump, neck
R22.2 Localized swelling, mass and lump, trunk
R22.3 Localized swelling, mass and lump, upper limb
R22.4 Localized swelling, mass and lump, lower limb
R22.7 Localized swelling, mass and lump, multiple sites
R22.9 Localized swelling, mass and lump, unspecified
R23
R23.0
R23.1
R23.2
738
Other skin changes
Cyanosis
Excludes:
acrocyanosis (I73.8)
cyanotic attacks of newborn (P28.2)
Pallor Clammy skin
Includes: 
Flushing Excessive blushing
Includes: menopausal and female climacteric states (N95.1)
Excludes: 
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
R23.3
Spontaneous ecchymoses
Includes:
Petechiae
Excludes:
ecchymoses in fetus and newborn (P54.5)
purpura (D69.-)
R23.4 Changes in skin texture
     Includes:
    Desquamation
   Induration
  of skin
 Scaling
Excludes:
epidermal thickening NOS (L85.9)
R23.8 
R23.8
Other and unspecified skin changes
739
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R25
Symptoms and signs involving the nervous and
musculoskeletal systems
(R25-R29)
R25
Abnormal involuntary movements
Excludes:
specific movement disorders (G20-G26)
stereotyped movement disorders (F98.4)
tic disorders (F95.-)
R25.0 Abnormal head movements
R25.1 Tremor, unspecified
     Excludes:
    chorea NOS (G25.5)
   tremor:
  •
   essential (G25.0)
  •
   hysterical (F44.4)
  •
   intention (G25.2)
R25.2 Cramp and spasm
     Excludes:
    carpopedal spasm (R29.0)
   infantile spasms (G40.4)
R25.3 Fasciculation
     Includes:
    Twitching NOS
R25.8 Other and unspecified abnormal involuntary movements
R26
Abnormalities of gait and mobility
Excludes:
ataxia:
•
NOS (R27.0)
•
hereditary (G11.-)
•
locomotor (syphilitic) (A52.1)
immobility syndrome (paraplegic) (M62.3)
R26.0 Ataxic gait
     Includes:
    Staggering gait
R26.1 Paralytic gait
     Includes:
    Spastic gait
R26.2 Difficulty in walking, not elsewhere classified
R26.3 Immobility
     Includes:
Bedfast
Chairfast
R26.8 Other and unspecified abnormalities of gait and mobility
R26.82o Unsteadiness on feet
R26.88o Other and unspecified abnormalities of gait and mobility
       Includes:
      antalgic gait
R27
Other lack of coordination
Excludes:
ataxic gait (R26.0)
hereditary ataxia (G11.-)
vertigo NOS (R42)
R27.0 Ataxia, unspecified
R27.8 Other and unspecified lack of coordination
740
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
R29
R29.0
Other symptoms and signs involving the nervous and musculoskeletal
systems
Tetany
Includes:
Excludes:
R29.8
Carpopedal spasm
tetany:
•
hysterical (F44.5)
•
neonatal (P71.3)
•
parathyroid (E20.9)
•
post-thyroidectomy (E89.2)
R29.1 Meningismus
R29.2 Abnormal reflex
     Excludes:
    abnormal pupillary reflex (H57.0)
   hyperactive gag reflex (J39.2)
  vasovagal reaction or syncope (R55)
R29.3 Abnormal posture
R29.4 Clicking hip
     Excludes:
    congenital deformities of hip (Q65.-)
R29.6 Tendency to fall, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Tendency to fall because of old age or other unclear health problems
   Excludes:
  accidents NOS (X59)
 difficulty in walking (R26.2)
dizziness and giddiness (R42)
falls causing injury (W00-W19)
falls due to diseases classified elsewhere
syncope and collapse (R55)
R29.8 Other and unspecified symptoms and signs involving the nervous and musculoskeletal
     systems
741
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R30
Symptoms and signs involving the urinary system
(R30-R39)
R30
Pain associated with micturition
Excludes: 
R30.0
psychogenic pain (F45.3)
Dysuria Strangury
Includes: 
R30.1 Vesical tenesmus
R30.9 Painful micturition, unspecified
     Includes:
    Painful urination NOS
R31
Unspecified haematuria
Includes:
Excludes:
Essential hematuria
benign hematuria (N02.-)
recurrent or persistent haematuria (N02.-)
R31.0o Gross hematuria
R31.1o Microscopic hematuria
R31.8o Other and unspecified hematuria
R32
Unspecified urinary incontinence
Includes:
Excludes:
R33
Enuresis NOS
nonorganic enuresis (F98.0)
stress incontinence and other specified urinary incontinence (N39.3-N39.4)
Retention of urine
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify drug, if drug induced
R34
Anuria and oliguria
Excludes:
R35
that complicating:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07, O08.4)
•
pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O26.8-,O90.4)
Polyuria
Excludes:
psychogenic polyuria (F45.3)
R35.0o Nocturia
R35.8o Other and unspecified polyuria
      Includes:
     Frequency of micturition NOS
R36
Urethral discharge
Includes:
742
Penile discharge
Urethrorrhoea
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
R39
Other symptoms and signs involving the urinary system
R39.0 R39.1 Other difficulties with micturition
R39.10o Hesitancy of micturition
R39.11o Poor urinary stream
R39.12o Feeling of incomplete bladder emptying
R39.13o Urgency of micturition
R39.14o Dribbling of urine
       Excludes:
      Post-void dribbling (N39.4)
R39.18o Other and unspecified difficulties of micturition
       Includes:
      Splitting of urinary stream
     Straining
R39.2 Extrarenal uraemia
     Includes:
    Prerenal uraemia
R39.8 
R39.8
Extravasation of urine
Other and unspecified symptoms and signs involving the urinary system
743
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R40
Symptoms and signs involving cognition, perception,
emotional state and behaviour
(R40-R46)
Excludes:
R40
those constituting part of a pattern of mental disorder (F00-F99)
Somnolence, stupor and coma
Excludes:
coma:
•
diabetic (E10-E14 with common fourth character .0)
•
hepatic (K72.-)
•
hypoglycaemic (nondiabetic) (E15)
•
neonatal (P91.5)
•
uraemic (N19)
R40.0 Somnolence
     Includes:
    Drowsiness
R40.1 Stupor
     Includes:
    Excludes:
Semicoma
stupor:
•
catatonic (F20.2)
•
depressive (F31-F33)
•
dissociative (F44.2)
•
manic (F30.2)
R40.2 Coma, unspecified
R40.20o Persistent vegetative state
       Excludes:
      Locked-in syndrome or state (G83.5)
R40.29o Coma, unspecified
       Includes:
      Unconsciousness NOS
R41
Other symptoms and signs involving cognitive functions and awareness
Excludes:
dissociative [conversion] disorders (F44.-)
R41.0 Disorientation, unspecified
     Includes:
    Confusion NOS
   Excludes:
  psychogenic disorientation (F44.8)
R41.1 Anterograde amnesia
R41.2 Retrograde amnesia
R41.3 Other amnesia
     Includes:
    Amnesia NOS
   Excludes:
  amnesic syndrome:
 •
  due to psychoactive substance use (F10-F19 with common fourth character .6)
 •
  organic (F04)
 transient global amnesia (G45.4)
R41.6o Neurological neglect syndrome
      Includes:
     Asomatognosia
    Hemi-akinesia
   Hemi-inattention
  Hemispatial neglect
 Left-sided neglect
Sensory:
•
 extinction
•
 neglect
Visuospatial neglect
R41.8 Other and unspecified symptoms and signs involving cognitive functions and awareness
R41.80o Transient alteration of awareness
744
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
R41.88o
R42
Other and unspecified symptoms and signs involving cognitive functions and awareness
Dizziness and giddiness
Includes:
Excludes:
R43
R46.4
Light-headedness
Vertigo NOS
vertiginous syndromes (H81.-)
Disturbances of smell and taste
R43.0 Anosmia
R43.1 Parosmia
R43.2 Parageusia
R43.8 Other and unspecified disturbances of smell and taste
     Includes:
    Mixed disturbance of smell and taste
R44
Other symptoms and signs involving general sensations and perceptions
Excludes:
disturbances of skin sensation (R20.-)
R44.0 Auditory hallucinations
R44.1 Visual hallucinations
R44.2 Other hallucinations
R44.3 Hallucinations, unspecified
R44.8 Other and unspecified symptoms and signs involving general sensations and perceptions
R45
Symptoms and signs involving emotional state
R45.0 Nervousness
     Includes:
    Nervous tension
R45.1 Restlessness and agitation
R45.2 Unhappiness
     Includes:
    Depression, not yet clinically diagnosed
   Feeling depressed
  Sadness
 Worries NOS
Excludes:
depression, diagnosis confirmed clinically (F32.-)
R45.3 Demoralization and apathy
R45.4 Irritability and anger
R45.5 Hostility
R45.6 Physical violence
R45.7 State of emotional shock and stress, unspecified
R45.8 Other symptoms and signs involving emotional state
     Includes:
    Suicidal ideation (tendencies)
   Excludes:
  suicidal ideation constituting part of a mental disorder (F00-F99)
R46
Symptoms and signs involving appearance and behaviour
R46.0 Very low level of personal hygiene
R46.1 Bizarre personal appearance
R46.2 Strange and inexplicable behaviour
R46.3 Overactivity
R46.4 Slowness and poor responsiveness
     Excludes:
    stupor (R40.1)
745
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R46.5 
R46.5
Suspiciousness and marked evasiveness
R46.6 Undue concern and preoccupation with stressful events
R46.7 Verbosity and circumstantial detail obscuring reason for contact
     Includes:
    Circumstantial historian
   Excessive verbosity
  Poor historian NOS
R46.8 Other symptoms and signs involving appearance and behaviour
R46.80o Obsessive-compulsive behaviour
       Excludes:
      Obsessive-compulsive disorder (F42.-)
R46.88o Other symptoms and signs involving appearance and behaviour
       Includes:
      Concern about body image
     Difficult patient
    Feeling senile
   Feeling violent
  Hostile behaviour
 Self neglect NOS
Excludes:
body dismorphic disorder (F45.2)
hypochondriasis (F45.2)
insufficient intake of food and water due to self neglect (R63.6)
746
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
Symptoms and signs involving speech and voice
(R47-R49)
R47
R49.8
Speech disturbances, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
autism (F84.0-F84.1)
cluttering (F98.6)
specific developmental disorders of speech and language (F80.-)
stuttering [stammering] (F98.5)
R47.0 Dysphasia and aphasia
     Excludes:
    progressive isolated aphasia (G31.0)
R47.1 Dysarthria and anarthria
R47.8 Other and unspecified speech disturbances
R48
Dyslexia and other symbolic dysfunctions, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
specific developmental disorders of scholastic skills (F81.-)
R48.0 Dyslexia and alexia
R48.1 Agnosia
R48.2 Apraxia
R48.8 Other and unspecified symbolic dysfunctions
     Includes:
    Acalculia
   Agraphia
R49
Voice disturbances
Excludes:
psychogenic voice disturbance (F44.4)
R49.0 Dysphonia
     Includes:
    Hoarseness
R49.1 Aphonia
     Includes:
Loss of voice
R49.2 Hypernasality and hyponasality
R49.8 Other and unspecified voice disturbances
     Includes:
    Change in voice NOS
747
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R50
General symptoms and signs
(R50-R69)
R50
Fever of other and unknown origin
Excludes:
fever of unknown origin (during)(in):
•
labour (O75.2-)
•
newborn (P81.9)
puerperal pyrexia NOS (O86.4-)
R50.2 Drug-induced fever
     Note:
    Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX), if desired, to identify drug
R50.8 Other specified fever
     Includes:
    Fever with chills
   Fever with rigors
  Persistent fever
R50.9 Fever, unspecified
     Includes:
    Hyperpyrexia NOS
   Pyrexia NOS
  Excludes:
 malignant hyperthermia due to anaesthesia (T88.3)
R51
Headache
Includes:
Excludes:
R52
Facial pain NOS
atypical facial pain (G50.1)
migraine and other headache syndromes (G43-G44)
trigeminal neuralgia (G50.0)
Pain, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Excludes:
pain not referable to any one organ or body region
chronic pain personality syndrome (F62.8)
headache (R51)
pain (in):
•
abdomen (R10.-)
•
back (M54.9)
•
breast (N64.4)
•
chest (R07.1-R07.4)
•
ear (H92.0)
•
eye (H57.1)
•
joint (M25.5)
•
limb (M79.6)
•
lumbar region (M54.5)
•
pelvic and perineal (R10.2)
•
psychogenic (F45.4)
•
shoulder (M75.8)
•
spine (M54.-)
•
throat (R07.0)
•
tongue (K14.6)
•
tooth (K08.8-)
renal colic (N23)
R52.0 Acute pain
     Includes:
    Postoperative pain NOS
R52.1 Chronic intractable pain
R52.2 Other chronic pain
R52.9 Pain, unspecified
     Includes:
    Generalized pain NOS
748
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
R53
Malaise and fatigue
Includes:
Excludes:
R54
Asthenia NOS
Debility:
•
NOS
•
chronic
•
nervous
General physical deterioration
Lethargy
Tiredness
debility:
•
congenital (P96.9)
•
senile (R54)
exhaustion and fatigue (due to)(in):
•
combat (F43.0)
•
excessive exertion (T73.3)
•
exposure (T73.2)
•
heat (T67.-)
•
neurasthenia (F48.0)
•
pregnancy (O26.8-)
•
senile asthenia (R54)
fatigue syndrome (F48.0):
•
postviral (G93.3)
R56
Senility
Includes:
Old age
Senescence
Excludes:
R55
Senile:
•
asthenia
•
debility
senile psychosis (F03)
Syncope and collapse
Includes:
Excludes:
R56
without mention of psychosis
Blackout
Fainting
neurocirculatory asthenia (F45.3)
orthostatic hypotension (I95.1):
•
neurogenic (G90.3)
shock:
•
NOS (R57.9)
•
cardiogenic (R57.0)
•
complicating or following:
•
abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07,O08.3)
•
labour and delivery (O75.1-)
•
postoperative (T81.1)
Stokes-Adams attack (I45.9)
syncope:
•
carotid sinus (G90.0)
•
heat (T67.1)
•
psychogenic (F48.8)
unconsciousness NOS (R40.2-)
Convulsions, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
convulsions and seizures (in):
•
dissociative (F44.5)
•
epilepsy (G40)
•
newborn (P90)
749
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R56.0 
R56.0
Febrile convulsions
R56.01o Complex febrile convulsions
       Includes:
      Febrile seizure:
     •
      atypical
     •
      complex
     •
      complicated
     •
      simple (NOS)
     Use additional code to identify any associated status epilepticus (G41.-)
R56.09o Febrile convulsions, unspecified
R56.8 Other and unspecified convulsions
R56.80o Seizure disorder, so described
R56.88o Other and unspecified convulsions
       Includes:
      Convulsion NOS
     Fit NOS
    Seizure (isolated) NOS
R57
Shock, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
shock (due to):
•
anaesthesia (T88.2)
•
anaphylactic (due to):
•
NOS (T78.2)
•
adverse food reaction (T78.0)
•
serum (T80.5)
•
complicating or following abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07,O08.3)
•
electric (T75.4)
•
lightning (T75.0)
•
obstetric (O75.1-)
•
postoperative (T81.1)
•
psychic (F43.0)
•
traumatic (T79.4)
toxic shock syndrome (A48.3)
R57.0 Cardiogenic shock
R57.1 Hypovolaemic shock
R57.2 Septic shock
R57.8 Other shock
     Includes:
    Endotoxic shock
R57.9 Shock, unspecified
     Includes:
    Failure of peripheral circulation NOS
R58
Haemorrhage, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
R59
Haemorrhage NOS
Enlarged lymph nodes
Includes:
Excludes:
swollen glands
lymphadenitis:
•
NOS (I88.9)
•
acute (L04.-)
•
chronic(I88.1)
•
mesenteric (acute)(chronic) (I88.0)
R59.0 Localized enlarged lymph nodes
R59.1 Generalized enlarged lymph nodes
     Includes:
    Lymphadenopathy NOS
   Excludes:
  HIV disease resulting in (persistent) generalized lymphadenopathy (B24)
R59.9 Enlarged lymph nodes, unspecified
750
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
R60
Oedema, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
ascites (R18)
hydrops fetalis NOS (P83.2)
hydrothorax (J94.8)
oedema (of):
•
angioneurotic (T78.3)
•
cerebral (G93.6):
•
due to birth injury (P11.0)
•
gestational (O12.0-)
•
hereditary (Q82.0)
•
larynx (J38.4)
•
malnutrition (E40-E46)
•
nasopharynx (J39.2)
•
newborn (P83.3)
•
pharynx (J39.2)
•
pulmonary (J81)
R60.0 Localized oedema
R60.1 Generalized oedema
R60.9 
R62.9
Oedema, unspecified
Includes:
Fluid retention NOS
R61
Hyperhidrosis
R61.0 Localized hyperhidrosis
R61.1 Generalized hyperhidrosis
R61.9 Hyperhidrosis, unspecified
     Includes:
    Excessive sweating
   Night sweats
R62
Lack of expected normal physiological development
Excludes:
delayed puberty (E30.0)
R62.0 Delayed milestone
     Includes:
    Delayed attainment of expected physiological developmental stage
   Late:
  •
   talker
  •
   walker
R62.8 Other lack of expected normal physiological development
     Includes:
    Failure to:
   •
    gain weight
   •
    thrive
   Infantilism NOS
  Lack of growth
 Physical retardation
Excludes:
adult failure to thrive (R64)
HIV disease resulting in failure to thrive (B24)
physical retardation due to malnutrition (E45)
R62.9 Lack of expected normal physiological development, unspecified
751
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R63
Symptoms and signs concerning food and fluid intake
Includes:
Excludes:
R63
R63.0
Anorexia
Includes:
Excludes:
R63.1
Polydipsia
Includes:
aphagia
bulimia NOS (F50.2)
eating disorders of nonorganic origin (F50.-)
malnutrition (E40-E46)
Aphagia
Loss of appetite
anorexia nervosa (F50.0)
loss of appetite of nonorganic origin (F50.8)
Excessive thirst
R63.2 Polyphagia
     Includes:
    Excessive eating
   Hyperalimentation NOS
R63.3 Feeding difficulties and mismanagement
     Includes:
    Feeding problem NOS
   Excludes:
  feeding problems of newborn (P92.-)
 infant feeding disorder of nonorganic origin (F98.2)
R63.4 Abnormal weight loss
R63.5 Abnormal weight gain
     Excludes:
    excessive weight gain in pregnancy (O26.0-)
   obesity (E66.-)
R63.6 Insufficient intake of food and water due to self neglect
     Excludes:
    self neglect NOS (R46.88)
   starvation due to anorexia (R63.0)
  starvation due to privation of food (X53)
 thirst due to privation of water (X54)
R63.8 Other symptoms and signs concerning food and fluid intake
R64
Cachexia
Includes:
Excludes:
R65
Adult failure to thrive
HIV disease resulting in wasting syndrome (B24 )
malignant cachexia (C80.-)
nutritional marasmus (E41)
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome [SIRS]
Note:
This category should never be used in primary coding. The category is for use in multiple coding
to identify this condition resulting from any cause. A code from another chapter must be
assigned first to indicate the cause or underlying disease.
R65.0 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome of infectious origin without organ failure
R65.1 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome of infectious origin with acute organ failure
     Includes:
    Severe sepsis
R65.2 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome of noninfectious origin without organ failure
R65.3 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome of noninfectious origin with acute organ failure
R65.9 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome, unspecified
752
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
R68
Other general symptoms and signs
R68.0 R68.1 Nonspecific symptoms peculiar to infancy
           Includes:
          Excessive crying of infant
         Irritable infant
        Excludes:
       neonatal cerebral irritability (P91.3)
      teething syndrome (K00.7)
R68.2 Dry mouth, unspecified
     Excludes:
    dry mouth due to:
   •
    dehydration (E86)
   •
    sicca syndrome [Sjögren] (M35.0)
    salivary gland hyposecretion (K11.7)
R68.3 Clubbing of fingers
     Includes:
    Clubbing of nails
   Excludes:
  congenital clubfinger (Q68.1)
 congenital clubnail (Q84.6)
R68.8 
R71
Hypothermia, not associated with low environmental temperature
Excludes:
hypothermia (due to)(of):
•
 NOS (accidental) (T68)
•
 anaesthesia (T88.5)
•
 low environmental temperature (T68)
•
 newborn (P80.-)
Other specified general symptoms and signs
R69
Unknown and unspecified causes of morbidity
Includes:
Illness NOS
Undiagnosed disease, not specified as to the site or system involved
Abnormal findings on examination of blood, without diagnosis
(R70-R79)
Excludes:
R70
abnormalities (of)(on):
•
antenatal screening of mother (O28.-)
•
coagulation (D65-D68)
•
lipids (E78.-)
•
platelets and thrombocytes (D69.-)
•
white blood cells classified elsewhere (D70-D72)
diagnostic abnormal findings classified elsewhere - see Alphabetical Index
haemorrhagic and haematological disorders of fetus and newborn (P50-P61)
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and abnormality of plasma viscosity
R70.0 Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
R70.1 Abnormal plasma viscosity
R71
Abnormality of red blood cells
Includes:
Excludes:
Abnormal red-cell:
•
morphology NOS
•
volume NOS
Anisocytosis
Poikilocytosis
anaemias (D50-D64)
polycythaemia:
•
benign (familial) (D75.0)
•
neonatorum (P61.1)
•
secondary (D75.1)
•
vera (D45)
753
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R72
Abnormality of white blood cells, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Excludes:
R72
R73
Abnormal leukocyte differential NOS
leukocytosis (D72.8)
Elevated blood glucose level
Excludes:
neonatal disorders (P70.0- P70.2)
postsurgical hypoinsulinaemia (E89.1)
R73.0 Abnormal glucose tolerance test
     Includes:
    Diabetes:
   •
    chemical
   •
    latent
   Impaired glucose tolerance
  Prediabetes
 Excludes:
diabetes mellitus (E10-E14):
•
 in pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O24.-)
R73.8 Other evidence of elevated blood glucose level
R73.8 Other evidence of elevated blood Pre-meal (fasting) blood glucose between 8.0-11.9 mmol/L R73.800o blood glucose between 12.0-13.9 mmol/L R73.801o R73.811o
glucose level 
blood glucose greater than or equal to 14.0 mmol/L R73.802o R73.812o
R73.9
R74
Post-meal (or NOS)
---
Hyperglycaemia, unspecified
Excludes:
diabetes mellitus (E10-E14):
•
in pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O24.-)
Abnormal serum enzyme levels
R74.0 Elevation of levels of transaminase and lactic acid dehydrogenase [LDH]
R74.8 Abnormal levels of other serum enzymes
     Includes:
    Abnormal level of:
   •
    acid phosphatase
   •
    alkaline phosphatase
   •
    amylase
   •
    lipase [triacylglycerol lipase]
R74.9 Abnormal level of unspecified serum enzyme
R75
Laboratory evidence of human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]
Includes:
Excludes:
R76
Nonconclusive HIV-test finding in infants
asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection status (Z21)
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease (B24)
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease in pregnancy (O98.7-)
Other abnormal immunological findings in serum
R76.0 Raised antibody titre
     Excludes:
    isoimmunization, in pregnancy (O36.0-O36.1):
   •
    affecting fetus or newborn (P55.-)
R76.1 Abnormal reaction to tuberculin test
     Includes:
    Abnormal result of Mantoux test (Positive PPD)
R76.2 False-positive serological test for syphilis
     Includes:
    False-positive Wassermann reaction
R76.8 Other specified abnormal immunological findings in serum
     Includes:
    Raised level of immunoglobulins NOS
754
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
R76.9
R77
Abnormal immunological finding in serum, unspecified
Other abnormalities of plasma proteins
Excludes:
R79.9
disorders of plasma-protein metabolism (E88.0)
R77.0 Abnormality of albumin
R77.1 Abnormality of globulin
     Includes:
    Hyperglobulinaemia NOS
R77.2 Abnormality of alphafetoprotein
R77.8 Other specified abnormalities of plasma proteins
R77.9 Abnormality of plasma protein, unspecified
R78
Findings of drugs and other substances, not normally found in blood
Excludes:
mental and behavioural disorders due to psychoactive substance use (F10-F19)
R78.0 Finding of alcohol in blood
     Use additional external cause code (Y90.-) for detail regarding alcohol level.
R78.1 Finding of opiate drug in blood
R78.2 Finding of cocaine in blood
R78.3 Finding of hallucinogen in blood
R78.4 Finding of other drugs of addictive potential in blood
R78.5 Finding of psychotropic drug in blood
R78.6 Finding of steroid agent in blood
R78.7 Finding of abnormal level of heavy metals in blood
R78.8 Finding of other specified substances, not normally found in blood
     Includes:
    Finding of abnormal level of lithium in blood
R78.9 Finding of unspecified substance, not normally found in blood
R79
Other abnormal findings of blood chemistry
Excludes:
abnormality of fluid, electrolyte or acid-base balance (E86-E87)
asymptomatic hyperuricaemia (E79.0)
hyperglycaemia NOS (R73.9)
hypoglycaemia:
•
NOS (E16.2)
•
neonatal (P70.3-P70.4)
specific findings indicating disorder of:
•
amino-acid metabolism (E70-E72)
•
carbohydrate metabolism (E73-E74)
•
lipid metabolism (E75.-)
R79.0 Abnormal level of blood mineral
     Includes:
    Abnormal blood level of:
   •
    cobalt
   •
    copper
   •
    iron
   •
    magnesium
   •
    mineral NEC
   •
    zinc
   Excludes:
  abnormal level of lithium (R78.8)
 disorders of mineral metabolism (E83.-)
neonatal hypomagnesaemia (P71.2)
nutritional mineral deficiency (E58-E61)
R79.8 Other specified abnormal findings of blood chemistry
     Includes:
    Abnormal blood-gas level
R79.9 Abnormal finding of blood chemistry, unspecified
755
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R80
Abnormal findings on examination of urine, without diagnosis
(R80-R82)
Excludes:
R80
abnormal findings on antenatal screening of mother (O28.-)
diagnostic abnormal findings classified elsewhere - see Alphabetical Index
specific findings indicating disorder of:
•
amino-acid metabolism (E70-E72)
•
carbohydrate metabolism (E73-E74)
Isolated proteinuria
Includes:
Excludes:
R81
Glycosuria
Excludes:
R82
Albuminuria NOS
Bence Jones proteinuria
Proteinuria NOS
proteinuria:
•
gestational (O12.1-)
•
isolated, with specified morphological lesion (N06.-)
•
orthostatic (N39.2)
•
persistent (N39.1)
renal glycosuria (E74.8)
Other abnormal findings in urine
Excludes:
haematuria (R31)
R82.0 Chyluria
     Excludes:
filarial chyluria (B74.-)
R82.1 Myoglobinuria
R82.2 Biliuria
R82.3 Haemoglobinuria
     Excludes:
    haemoglobinuria:
   •
    due to haemolysis from external causes NEC (D59.6)
   •
    paroxysmal nocturnal [Marchiafava-Micheli] (D59.5)
R82.4 Acetonuria
     Includes:
    Ketonuria
R82.5 Elevated urine levels of drugs, medicaments and biological substances
     Includes:
    Elevated urine levels of:
   •
    17-ketosteroids
   •
    catecholamines
   •
    indoleacetic acid
   •
    steroids
R82.6 Abnormal urine levels of substances chiefly nonmedicinal as to source
     Includes:
    Abnormal urine level of heavy metals
R82.7 Abnormal findings on microbiological examination of urine
     Includes:
    Positive culture findings
R82.8 Abnormal findings on cytological and histological examination of urine
R82.9 Other and unspecified abnormal findings in urine
     Includes:
    Cells and casts in urine
   Crystalluria
  Melanuria
756
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
Abnormal findings on examination of other body fluids,
substances and tissues, without diagnosis
(R83-R89)
Excludes:
R83
R84.7
abnormal findings on:
•
antenatal screening of mother (O28.-)
•
examination of:
•
blood, without diagnosis (R70-R79)
•
urine, without diagnosis (R80-R82)
diagnostic abnormal findings classified elsewhere - see Alphabetical Index
Abnormal findings in cerebrospinal fluid
R83.0 Abnormal findings in cerebrospinal fluid, abnormal level of enzymes
R83.2 Abnormal findings in cerebrospinal fluid, abnormal level of other drugs, medicaments and
     biological substances
R83.3 Abnormal findings in cerebrospinal fluid, abnormal level of substances chiefly nonmedicinal
     as to source
R83.4 Abnormal findings in cerebrospinal fluid, abnormal immunological findings
R83.5 Abnormal findings in cerebrospinal fluid, abnormal microbiological findings
     Includes:
    Positive culture findings
R83.6 Abnormal findings in cerebrospinal fluid, abnormal cytological findings
     Includes:
    Abnormal Papanicolaou smear
R83.7 Abnormal findings in cerebrospinal fluid, abnormal histological findings
R83.8 Abnormal findings in cerebrospinal fluid, other abnormal findings
     Includes:
    Abnormal chromosomal findings
R83.9 Abnormal findings in cerebrospinal fluid, unspecified abnormal finding
R84
Abnormal findings in specimens from respiratory organs and thorax
Includes:
Excludes:
Abnormal findings in:
•
bronchial washings
•
nasal secretions
•
pleural fluid
•
sputum
•
throat scrapings
blood-stained sputum (R04.2)
R84.0 Abnormal findings in specimens from respiratory organs and thorax, abnormal level of
     enzymes
R84.2 Abnormal findings in specimens from respiratory organs and thorax, abnormal level of other
     drugs, medicaments and biological substances
R84.3 Abnormal findings in specimens from respiratory organs and thorax, abnormal level of
     substances chiefly nonmedicinal as to source
R84.4 Abnormal findings in specimens from respiratory organs and thorax, abnormal
     immunological findings
R84.5 Abnormal findings in specimens from respiratory organs and thorax, abnormal
     microbiological findings
    Includes:
   Positive culture findings
R84.6 Abnormal findings in specimens from respiratory organs and thorax, abnormal cytological
     findings
    Includes:
   Abnormal Papanicolaou smear
R84.7 Abnormal findings in specimens from respiratory organs and thorax, abnormal histological
     findings
757
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R84.8 
R84.8
Abnormal findings in specimens from respiratory organs and thorax, other abnormal findings
Includes:
Abnormal chromosomal findings
R84.9 Abnormal findings in specimens from respiratory organs and thorax, unspecified abnormal
     finding
R85
Abnormal findings in specimens from digestive organs and abdominal cavity
Includes:
Excludes:
Abnormal findings in:
•
peritoneal fluid
•
saliva
faecal abnormalities (R19.58)
R85.0 Abnormal findings in specimens from digestive organs and abdominal cavity, abnormal level
     of enzymes
R85.1 Abnormal findings in specimens from digestive organs and abdominal cavity, abnormal level
     of hormones
R85.2 Abnormal findings in specimens from digestive organs and abdominal cavity, abnormal level
     of other drugs, medicaments and biological substances
R85.3 Abnormal findings in specimens from digestive organs and abdominal cavity, abnormal level
     of substances chiefly nonmedicinal as to source
R85.4 Abnormal findings in specimens from digestive organs and abdominal cavity, abnormal
     immunological findings
R85.5 Abnormal findings in specimens from digestive organs and abdominal cavity, abnormal
     microbiological findings
    Includes:
   Positive culture findings
R85.6 Abnormal findings in specimens from digestive organs and abdominal cavity, abnormal
     cytological findings
    Includes:
   Abnormal Papanicolaou smear
R85.7 Abnormal findings in specimens from digestive organs and abdominal cavity, abnormal
     histological findings
R85.8 Abnormal findings in specimens from digestive organs and abdominal cavity, other abnormal
     findings
    Includes:
   Abnormal chromosomal findings
R85.9 Abnormal findings in specimens from digestive organs and abdominal cavity, unspecified
     abnormal finding
R86
Abnormal findings in specimens from male genital organs
Includes:
Excludes:
Abnormal:
•
findings in:
•
prostatic secretions
•
semen, seminal fluid
•
spermatozoa
azoospermia (N46)
oligospermia (N46)
R86.0 Abnormal findings in specimens from male genital organs, abnormal level of enzymes
R86.1 Abnormal findings in specimens from male genital organs, abnormal level of hormones
R86.2 Abnormal findings in specimens from male genital organs, abnormal level of other drugs,
     medicaments and biological substances
R86.3 Abnormal findings in specimens from male genital organs, abnormal level of substances
     chiefly nonmedicinal as to source
R86.4 Abnormal findings in specimens from male genital organs, abnormal immunological findings
R86.5 Abnormal findings in specimens from male genital organs, abnormal microbiological findings
     Includes:
    Positive culture findings
R86.6 Abnormal findings in specimens from male genital organs, abnormal cytological findings
758
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
R86.7 Abnormal findings in specimens from male genital organs, abnormal histological findings
R86.8 Abnormal findings in specimens from male genital organs, other abnormal findings
     Includes:
    Abnormal chromosomal findings
R86.9 Abnormal findings in specimens from male genital organs, unspecified abnormal finding
R87
R87.9
Abnormal findings in specimens from female genital organs
Includes:
Excludes:
Abnormal findings in secretions and smears from:
•
cervix uteri
•
vagina
•
vulva
carcinoma in situ (D05-D07.3)
dysplasia of:
•
cervix uteri (N87.-)
•
vagina (N89.0-N89.3)
•
vulva (N90.0-N90.3)
R87.0 Abnormal findings in specimens from female genital organs, abnormal level of enzymes
R87.1 Abnormal findings in specimens from female genital organs, abnormal level of hormones
R87.2 Abnormal findings in specimens from female genital organs, abnormal level of other drugs,
     medicaments and biological substances
R87.3 Abnormal findings in specimens from female genital organs, abnormal level of substances
     chiefly nonmedicinal as to source
R87.4 Abnormal findings in specimens from female genital organs, abnormal immunological
     findings
R87.5 Abnormal findings in specimens from female genital organs, abnormal microbiological
     findings
    Includes:
   Positive culture findings
R87.6 Abnormal findings in specimens from female genital organs, abnormal cytological findings
     Includes:
    Abnormal Papanicolaou smear
R87.7 Abnormal findings in specimens from female genital organs, abnormal histological findings
R87.8 Abnormal findings in specimens from female genital organs, other abnormal findings
     Includes:
    Abnormal chromosomal findings
R87.9 Abnormal findings in specimens from female genital organs, unspecified abnormal finding
759
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R89
Abnormal findings in specimens from other organs, systems and tissues
Includes:
R89
Abnormal findings in:
•
nipple discharge
•
synovial fluid
•
wound secretions
R89.0 Abnormal findings in specimens from other organs, abnormal level of enzymes
R89.1 Abnormal findings in specimens from other organs, abnormal level of hormones
R89.2 Abnormal findings in specimens from other organs, abnormal level of other drugs,
     medicaments and biological substances
R89.3 Abnormal findings in specimens from other organs, abnormal level of substances chiefly
     nonmedicinal as to source
R89.4 Abnormal findings in specimens from other organs, abnormal immunological findings
R89.5 Abnormal findings in specimens from other organs, abnormal microbiological findings
     Includes:
    Positive culture findings
R89.6 Abnormal findings in specimens from other organs, abnormal cytological findings
     Includes:
    Abnormal Papanicolaou smear
R89.7 Abnormal findings in specimens from other organs, abnormal histological findings
R89.8 Abnormal findings in specimens from other organs, other abnormal findings
     Includes:
    Abnormal chromosomal findings
R89.9 Abnormal findings in specimens from other organs, unspecified abnormal finding
760
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging and in function
studies, without diagnosis
(R90-R94)
Includes:
Excludes:
R90
R93.8
nonspecific abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging by:
•
computerized axial tomography [CAT scan]
•
magnetic resonance imaging [MRI][NMR]
•
positron emission tomography [PET scan]
•
thermography
•
ultrasound [echogram]
•
Xray examination
abnormal findings on antenatal screening of mother (O28.-)
diagnostic abnormal findings classified elsewhere - see Alphabetical Index
Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of central nervous system
R90.0 Intracranial space-occupying lesion
R90.8 Other abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of central nervous system
     Includes:
    Abnormal echoencephalogram
   White matter disease NOS
R91
Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of lung
Includes:
Coin lesion NOS
Lung mass NOS
R92 Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of breast
R93 Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of other body structures
R93.0 Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of skull and head, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    intracranial space-occupying lesion (R90.0)
R93.1 Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of heart and coronary circulation
     Includes:
    Abnormal:
   •
    echocardiogram NOS
   •
    heart shadow
R93.2 Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of liver and biliary tract
     Includes:
    Nonvisualization of gallbladder
R93.3 Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of other parts of digestive tract
R93.4 Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of urinary organs
     Includes:
    Filling defect of:
   •
    bladder
   •
    kidney
   •
    ureter
   Excludes:
  hypertrophy of kidney (N28.80)
R93.5 Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of other abdominal regions, including
     retroperitoneum
R93.6 Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of limbs
     Excludes:
    abnormal finding in skin and subcutaneous tissue (R93.8)
R93.7 Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of other parts of musculoskeletal system
     Excludes:
    abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of skull (R93.0)
R93.8 Abnormal findings on diagnostic imaging of other specified body structures
     Includes:
    Abnormal radiological finding in skin and subcutaneous tissue
   Mediastinal shift
761
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
R94
Abnormal results of function studies
Includes:
R94
abnormal results of:
•
radionuclide [radioisotope] uptake studies
•
scintigraphy
R94.0 Abnormal results of function studies of central nervous system
     Includes:
    Abnormal electroencephalogram [EEG]
R94.1 Abnormal results of function studies of peripheral nervous system and special senses
     Includes:
    Abnormal:
   •
    electro-oculogram [EOG]
   •
    electromyogram [EMG]
   •
    electroretinogram [ERG]
   •
    response to nerve stimulation
   •
    visually evoked potential [VEP]
R94.2 Abnormal results of pulmonary function studies
     Includes:
    Reduced:
   •
    ventilatory capacity
   •
    vital capacity
R94.3 Abnormal results of cardiovascular function studies
R94.30o Electrocardiogram suggestive of ST segment elevation myocardial infarction [STEMI]
R94.31o Abnormal cardiovascular function studies (biomarkers or ECG) suggestive of non ST
       segment elevation myocardial infarction [NSTEMI]
      Includes:
     ST depression
    T waves
R94.38o Other and unspecified abnormal results of cardiovascular function studies
       Includes:
      Abnormal:
     •
      electrocardiogram [ECG] [EKG] not elsewhere classified
     •
      electrophysiological intracardiac studies
     •
      phonocardiogram
     •
      vectorcardiogram
R94.4 Abnormal results of kidney function studies
     Includes:
    Abnormal renal function test
R94.5 Abnormal results of liver function studies
R94.6 Abnormal results of thyroid function studies
R94.7 Abnormal results of other endocrine function studies
     Excludes:
    abnormal glucose tolerance test (R73.0)
R94.8 Abnormal results of function studies of other organs and systems
     Includes:
    Abnormal:
   •
    basal metabolic rate [BMR]
   •
    bladder
   function test
  •
   splenic
762
SYMPTOMS, SIGNS AND ABNORMAL CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS (R00-R99)
Ill-defined and unknown causes of mortality
(R95-R99)
Excludes:
R99
fetal death of unspecified cause (P95)
obstetric death NOS (O95)
R95 Sudden infant death syndrome
R96 Other sudden death, cause unknown
Excludes:
sudden:
•
cardiac death, so described (I46.1)
•
infant death syndrome (R95)
R96.0 Instantaneous death
     Includes:
    Sudden unexplained death in adult
   Excludes:
  Sudden death of known aetiology (A00.0-Q99.9, U04.9-, V01.0 - Y89.9)
R96.1 Death occurring less than 24 hours from onset of symptoms, not otherwise explained
     Includes:
    Death:
   •
    known not to be violent or instantaneous for which no cause can be discovered
   •
    without sign of disease
R98
Unattended death
Includes:
R99
Death in circumstances where the body of the deceased was found and no cause could be
discovered
Found dead
Other ill-defined and unspecified causes of mortality
Includes:
Death NOS
Unknown cause of mortality
763
I
CHAPTER XIX
Injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of
external causes
(S00-T98)
Note:
The chapter uses the S-section for coding different types of injuries related to single body regions and the T-
section to cover injuries to multiple or unspecified body regions as well as poisoning and certain other
consequences of external causes.
Where multiple sites of injury are specified in the titles, the word "with" indicates involvement of both sites,
and the word "and" indicates involvement of either or both sites.
The principle of multiple coding of injuries should be followed wherever possible.
Combination categories for multiple injuries is provided for use when there are insufficient detail as to the
nature of the individual conditions, or for primary tabulation purposes when it is more convenient to record
single code; otherwise, the component injuries should be coded separately.
Reference should also be made to the coding rules and guidelines.
The blocks of the S-section as well as (T00-T14 and T90-T98) contain injuries at the three-character level
classified by type as follows:
Superficial injury including:
abrasion
blister (nonthermal)
contusion, including bruise and haematoma
injury from superficial foreign body (splinter) without major open wound
insect bite (nonvenomous)
Open wound including:
animal bite
cut
laceration
puncture wound:
•
NOS
•
with (penetrating) foreign body
Fracture including:
Closed fracture:
• closed
• comminuted
• depressed
• dislocated
• displaced
• elevated
• fissured
• greenstick
• impacted
• linear
• march
• simple
• slipped epiphysis
• spiral
with or without delayed healing
765
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Open fracture:
• compound
• infected
• missile
• puncture
• with foreign body
with or without delayed healing
Excludes:
malunion of fracture (M84.0)
nonunion of fracture [pseudoarthrosis] (M84.1)
pathological fracture (M84.4)
osteoporotic fracture (M80.-)
stress fracture (M84.3)
Dislocation, sprain and strain including:
traumatic:
•
haemarthosis
•
rupture
•
subluxation
•
tear
avulsion
laceration
sprain
strain
of
cartilage
joint (capsule)
ligament
Injury to nerves and spinal cord including:
complete or incomplete lesion of spinal cord
lesion incontinuity of nerves and spinal cord
traumatic:
•
division of nerve
•
haematomyelia
•
paralysis(transient)
•
paraplegia
•
quadriplegia
Injury to blood vessels including
traumatic:
•
aneurysm or fistula (arteriovenous)
•
arterial haematoma
•
rupture
avulsion
cut
laceration
of blood vessels
Injury of muscle, fascia and tendon including:
avulsion
cut
of muscle, fascia and tendon
laceration
traumatic rupture
Crushing Injury
Traumatic amputation
766
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
Injury to internal organs including:
traumatic:
•
haematoma
•
puncture
•
rupture
•
tear
blast injuries
bruise
concussion injuries
crushing
laceration
Excludes:
of internal organs
Other and unspecified injuries
birth trauma (P10-P15)
obstetric trauma (O70-O71)
This chapter contains the following blocks:
S00-S09
S10-S19
S20-S29
S30-S39
S40-S49
S50-S59
S60-S69
S70-S79
S80-S89
S90-S99
T00-T07
T08-T14
T15-T19
T20-T25
T20-T32
T26-T28
T29-T32
T33-T35
T36-T50
T51-T65
T66-T78
T79-T79
T80-T88
T90-T98
Injuries to the head
Injuries to the neck
Injuries to the thorax
Injuries to the abdomen, lower back, lumbar spine and pelvis
Injuries to the shoulder and upper arm
Injuries to the elbow and forearm
Injuries to the wrist and hand
Injuries to the hip and thigh
Injuries to the knee and lower leg
Injuries to the ankle and foot
Injuries involving multiple body regions
Injuries to unspecified parts of trunk, limb or body region
Effects of foreign body entering through natural orifice
Burns and corrosions of external body surface, specified by site
Burns and corrosions
Burns and corrosions confined to eye and internal organs
Burns and corrosions of multiple and unspecified body regions
Frostbite
Poisoning by drugs, medicaments and biological substances
Toxic effects of substances chiefly nonmedicinal as to source
Other and unspecified effects of external causes
Certain early complications of trauma (T79)
Complications of surgical and medical care, not elsewhere classified
Sequelae of injuries, of poisoning and of other consequences of external causes
767
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S00
Injuries to the head
(S00-S09)
Includes:
Excludes:
S00
Injuries of ear
injuries of:
•
eye
•
face [any part]
•
gum
•
jaw
•
oral cavity
•
palate
•
periocular area
•
scalp
•
temporo-mandibular joint area
•
tongue
•
tooth
burns and corrosions (T20-T32)
effects of foreign body:
•
in:
•
ear (T16)
•
larynx (T17.3)
•
mouth (T18.0)
•
nose (T17.0-T17.1)
•
pharynx (T17.2)
•
on external eye (T15.-)
frostbite (T33-T35)
insect bite or sting, venomous (T63.4)
Superficial injury of head
Excludes:
Cerebral contusion (diffuse) (S06.2-):
•
focal (S06.3-)
injury of eye and orbit (S05.-)
S00.0 Superficial injury of scalp
S00.1 Contusion of eyelid and periocular area
     Includes:
    Black eye
   Excludes:
  contusion of eyeball and orbital tissues (S05.1)
S00.2 Other superficial injuries of eyelid and periocular area
     Excludes:
    superficial injury of conjunctiva and cornea (S05.0)
S00.3 Superficial injury of nose
S00.4 Superficial injury of ear
S00.5 Superficial injury of lip and oral cavity
S00.7 Multiple superficial injuries of head
S00.8 Superficial injury of other parts of head
S00.9 Superficial injury of head, part unspecified
S01
Open wound of head
Excludes:
decapitation (S18)
injury of eye and orbit (S05.-)
traumatic amputation of other part of head (S08.-)
S01.0 Open wound of scalp
     Excludes:
    avulsion of scalp (S08.0)
   traumatic amputation of other parts of head (S08.8)
S01.00o Open wound of scalp, uncomplicated
768
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S01.01o Open wound of scalp, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S01.1 Open wound of eyelid and periocular area
     Includes:
    Open wound of eyelid and periocular area with or without involvement of lacrimal passages
S01.10o Open wound of eyelid and periocular area, uncomplicated
S01.11o Open wound of eyelid and periocular area, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S01.2 Open wound of nose
S01.20o Open wound of nose, uncomplicated
S01.21o Open wound of nose, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S01.3 Open wound of ear
S01.30o Open wound of ear, uncomplicated
S01.31o Open wound of ear, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S01.4 Open wound of cheek and temporomandibular area
S01.40o Open wound of cheek and temporomandibular area, uncomplicated
S01.41o Open wound of cheek and temporomandibular area, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S01.5 Open wound of lip and oral cavity
     Excludes:
    tooth:
   •
    dislocation (S03.2)
   •
    fracture (S02.5)
S01.50o Open wound of lip and oral cavity, uncomplicated
S01.51o Open wound of lip and oral cavity, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S01.7 Multiple open wounds of head
S01.70o Multiple open wounds of head, uncomplicated
S01.71o Multiple open wounds of head, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S01.8 Open wounds of other parts of head
S01.80o Open wounds of other parts of head, uncomplicated
S01.81o Open wounds of other parts of head, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S01.9 Open wound of head, part unspecified
S01.90o Open wound of head, part unspecified, uncomplicated
S01.91o Open wound of head, part unspecified, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S02
S02.001
Fracture of skull and facial bones
Code first any associated intracranial injury (S06.-)
S02.0 Fracture of vault of skull
     Includes:
    Frontal bone
   Parietal bone
S02.000 Fracture of vault of skull, closed
S02.001 Fracture of vault of skull, open
769
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S02.1 Fracture of base of skull
     Includes:
    Fossa:
   •
    anterior
   •
    middle
   •
    posterior
   Occiput
  pterygoid bone
 Sinus:
•
 ethmoid
•
 frontal
Sphenoid
Temporal bone
Excludes:
orbit NOS (S02.8)
orbital floor (S02.3)
S02.100 Fracture of base of skull, closed
S02.101 Fracture of base of skull, open
S02.2 Fracture of nasal bones
S02.200 Fracture of nasal bones, closed
S02.201 Fracture of nasal bones, open
S02.3 Fracture of orbital floor
     Excludes:
    orbit NOS (S02.8)
   orbital roof (S02.1)
S02.300 Fracture of orbital floor, closed
S02.301 Fracture of orbital floor, open
S02.4 Fracture of malar and maxillary bones
     Includes:
    Zygoma
S02.1
S02.4 Fracture of malar and maxillary
bones
S02.40 Fracture of malar and maxillary bones,
LeFort 1
Closed Open
S02.400o S02.401o
Includes Includes
• superior maxilla, upper jaw (bone) • superior maxilla, upper jaw (bone)
S02.41 Fracture of malar and maxillary bones, S02.410o S02.411o
LeFort 2 
S02.42 Fracture of malar and maxillary bones, S02.420o S02.421o
combined LeFort 1 with LeFort 2 (contralateral 
fractures) 
S02.43 Fracture of malar and maxillary bones, S02.430o S02.431o
LeFort 3, unilateral 
S02.44 Fracture of malar and maxillary bones, S02.440o S02.441o
LeFort 3, bilateral 
Includes Includes
• bilateral LeFort 3 and 2 or 1 • bilateral LeFort 3 and 2 or 1
S02.48 Other fracture of malar and maxillary S02.480o S02.481o
bones 
Includes Includes
• malar alone, zygoma • malar alone, zygoma
S02.49 Unspecified fracture of malar and S02.490o S02.491o
maxillary bones 
S02.5
770
Fracture of tooth
Includes:
Broken Tooth
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S02.6
Fracture of mandible
Includes:
Lower Jaw (bone)
S03.5
S02.6 Fracture of mandible Closed Open
S02.60 Fracture of mandible S02.600o S02.601o
Includes Includes
• mandible NOS. symphysis • mandible NOS, symphysis
S02.610o S02.611o
Includes Includes
• angle of jaw • angle of jaw
S02.620o S02.621o
Includes Includes
• condyle, subcondyle, coronoid process, glenoid • condyle, subcondyle, coronoid process, glenoid
  fossa fossa
S02.670o S02.671o
S02.61 Fracture of ramus
S02.62 Fracture of temporomandibular joint
S02.67 Multiple mandibular fracture sites
S02.7 Multiple fractures involving skull and facial bone
S02.70 Multiple fractures involving skull and facial bone
S02.700 Multiple fractures involving skull and facial bones, closed
S02.701 Multiple fractures involving skull and facial bones, open
S02.8 Fractures of other skull and facial bones
     Includes:
    Orbit NOS
   Palate
  Excludes:
 orbital:
•
 roof (S02.1-)
•
 floor (S02.3-)
S02.8 Fractures of other skull and facial Closed Open
bones 
S02.80 Fracture of alveolus S02.800o S02.801o
Includes Includes
• maxillary and mandibular alveolar ridge • maxillary and mandibular alveolar ridge
S02.810o S02.811o
S02.89 Fractures of other unspecified skull and S02.890o S02.891o
facial bones 
S02.81 Fracture of hard palate
S02.9 Fracture of skull and facial bones, part unspecified
S02.90 Fracture of skull and facial bones, part unspecified
S02.900 Fracture of skull and facial bones, part unspecified, closed
S02.901 Fracture of skull and facial bones, part unspecified, open
S03
Dislocation, sprain and strain of joints and ligaments of head
S03.0 Dislocation of jaw
     Includes:
    Jaw (cartilage)(meniscus)
   Mandible
  Temporomandibular (joint)
S03.1 Dislocation of septal cartilage of nose
S03.2 Dislocation of tooth
S03.3 Dislocation of other and unspecified parts of head
S03.4 Sprain and strain of jaw
     Includes:
    Temporomandibular (joint)(ligament)
S03.5 Sprain and strain of joints and ligaments of other and unspecified parts of head
771
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S04
S04
Injury of cranial nerves
S04.0 Injury of optic nerve and pathways
     Includes:
    2nd cranial nerve
   Optic chiasm
  Visual cortex
S04.00o Laceration of optic nerve and pathways
S04.08o Other and unspecified injury of optic nerve and pathways
S04.1 Injury of oculomotor nerve
     Includes:
    3rd cranial nerve
S04.10o Laceration of oculomotor nerve
S04.18o Other and unspecified injury of oculomotor nerve
S04.2 Injury of trochlear nerve
     Includes:
    4th cranial nerve
S04.20o Laceration of trochlear nerve
S04.28o Other and unspecified injury of trochlear nerve
S04.3 Injury of trigeminal nerve
     Includes:
    5th cranial nerve
S04.30o Laceration of trigeminal nerve
S04.38o Other and unspecified injury of trigeminal nerve
S04.4 Injury of abducent nerve
     Includes:
    6th cranial nerve
S04.40o Laceration of abducent nerve
S04.48o Other and unspecified injury of abducent nerve
S04.5 Injury of facial nerve
     Includes:
    7th cranial nerve
S04.50o Laceration of facial nerve
S04.58o Other and unspecified injury of facial nerve
S04.6 Injury of acoustic nerve
     Includes:
    8th cranial nerve
   Auditory nerve
S04.60o Laceration of acoustic nerve
S04.68o Other and unspecified injury of acoustic nerve
S04.7 Injury of accessory nerve
     Includes:
    11th cranial nerve
S04.70o Laceration of accessory nerve
S04.78o Other and unspecified injury of accessory nerve
S04.8 Injury of other cranial nerves
     Includes:
    Glossopharyngeal [9th] nerve
   Hypoglossal [12th] nerve
  Olfactory [1st] nerve
 Vagus [10th] nerve
S04.80o Laceration of other cranial nerves
S04.88o Other and unspecified injury of other cranial nerves
S04.9 Injury of unspecified cranial nerve
S04.90o Laceration of unspecified cranial nerve
S04.98o Other and unspecified injury of unspecified cranial nerve
772
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S05
Injury of eye and orbit
Excludes:
Injury of oculomotor [3rd] nerve (S04.1)
injury of optic [2nd] nerve (S04.0)
open wound of eyelid and periocular area (S01.1)
orbital bone fracture (S02.1, S02.3, S02.8)
superficial injury of eyelid (S00.1-S00.2)
S05.0 Injury of conjunctiva and corneal abrasion without mention of foreign body
     Excludes:
    foreign body in:
   •
    conjunctival sac (T15.1)
   •
    cornea (T15.0)
S05.1 Contusion of eyeball and orbital tissues
     Includes:
    corneal contusion
   Traumatic hyphaema
  Excludes:
 black eye (S00.1)
contusion of eyelid and periocular area (S00.1)
S05.2 Ocular laceration and rupture with prolapse or loss of intraocular tissue
S05.3 Ocular laceration without prolapse or loss of intraocular tissue
     Includes:
    Laceration of eye NOS
S05.4 Penetrating wound of orbit with or without foreign body
     Excludes:
    retained (old) foreign body following penetrating wound of orbit (H05.5)
S05.5 Penetrating wound of eyeball with foreign body
     Excludes:
    retained (old) intraocular foreign body (H44.6-H44.7)
S05.6 Penetrating wound of eyeball without foreign body
     Includes:
    Ocular penetration NOS
S05.7 Avulsion of eye
     Includes:
    Traumatic enucleation
S05.8 Other injuries of eye and orbit
     Includes:
    Lacrimal duct injury
S05.9 
S06.26o
Injury of eye and orbit, unspecified
Includes:
Injury of eye NOS
S06
Intracranial injury
Use additional code to identify any associated fracture (S02.-)
S06.0 Concussion
     Includes:
    Commotio cerebri
S06.1 Traumatic cerebral oedema
     Use additional code to identify any resulting diffuse or focal brain injury (S06.2-, S06.3-)
S06.2 Diffuse brain injury
     Includes:
    Cerebral:
   •
    contusion NOS
   •
    laceration NOS
   Diffuse axonal injury (DAI)
  Traumatic compression (herniation) of brain with diffuse axonal injury
 Traumatic compression of brain NOS
S06.25o Diffuse brain injury without open intracranial wound
S06.26o Diffuse brain injury with open intracranial wound
773
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S06.3 Focal brain injury
     Includes:
    Focal:
   •
    cerebral:
   •
    contusion
   •
    laceration
   •
    traumatic intracerebral hemorrhage
S06.35o Focal brain injury without open intracranial wound
S06.36o Focal brain injury with open intracranial wound
S06.4 Epidural haemorrhage
     Includes:
    Extradural hemorrhage (traumatic)
S06.5 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage
S06.6 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage
S06.8 Other intracranial injuries
     Includes:
    Traumatic haemorrhage:
   •
    cerebellar hemorrhage
   •
    intracranial hemorrhage NOS
S06.85o Other intracranial injuries without open intracranial wound
S06.86o Other intracranial injuries with open intracranial wound
S06.9 Intracranial injury, unspecified
     Includes:
    Brain injury NOS
   Excludes:
  head Injury NOS (S09.9)
S06.3
S07
Crushing injury of head
S07.0 Crushing injury of face
S07.1 Crushing injury of skull
S07.8 Crushing injury of other parts of head
S07.9 Crushing injury of head, part unspecified
S08
Traumatic amputation of part of head
S08.0 Avulsion of scalp
     Excludes:
    open wound of scalp (S01.0)
S08.1 Traumatic amputation of ear
S08.8 Traumatic amputation of other parts of head
     Excludes:
    open wound of other parts of head (S01.8)
S08.9 Traumatic amputation of unspecified part of head
     Excludes:
    decapitation (S18)
   open wound of unspecified part of head (S01.9)
774
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S09
Other and unspecified injuries of head
S09.0 S09.1 Injury of muscle and tendon of head
S09.10o Laceration of muscle and tendon of head
S09.18o Other and unspecified injury of muscle and tendon of head
S09.2 Traumatic rupture of ear drum
S09.7 Multiple injuries of head
     Includes:
    Injuries classifiable to more than one of the categories (S00-S09.2)
S09.8 Other specified injuries of head
S09.9 
S09.9
Injury of blood vessels of head, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
injury of:
•
 cerebral blood vessels (S06.-)
•
 precerebral blood vessels (S15.-)
Unspecified injury of head
Includes:
Injury of:
•
 ear NOS
•
 face NOS
•
 nose NOS
775
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S10
Injuries to the neck
(S10-S19)
Includes:
Excludes:
injuries of:
•
nape
•
supraclavicular region
•
throat
burns and corrosions (T20-T32)
effects of foreign body in:
•
larynx (T17.3)
•
oesophagus (T18.1)
•
pharynx (T17.2)
•
trachea (T17.4)
fracture of spine NOS (T08)
frostbite (T33-T35)
injury of:
•
trunk NOS (T09.-)
insect bite or sting, venomous (T63.4)
S10 Superficial injury of neck
S10.0 Contusion of throat
     Includes:
    Cervical oesophagus
   Larynx
  Pharynx
 Trachea
S10.1 Other and unspecified superficial injuries of throat
S10.7 Multiple superficial injuries of neck
S10.8 Superficial injury of other parts of neck
S10.9 Superficial injury of neck, part unspecified
S11
Open wound of neck
Excludes:
decapitation (S18)
S11.0 Open wound involving larynx and trachea
     Includes:
    Trachea:
   •
    NOS
   •
    cervical
   Excludes:
  thoracic trachea (S27.5)
S11.00o Open wound involving larynx and trachea, uncomplicated
S11.01o Open wound involving larynx and trachea, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S11.1 Open wound involving thyroid gland
S11.10o Open wound involving thyroid gland, uncomplicated
S11.11o Open wound involving thyroid gland, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S11.2 Open wound involving pharynx and cervical esophagus
     Excludes:
    Open wound of:
   •
    abdominal esophagus (S36.3)
   •
    thoracic esophagus (S27.8)
S11.20o Open wound involving pharynx and cervical esophagus, uncomplicated
S11.21o Open wound involving pharynx and cervical esophagus, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
776
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S11.7 Multiple open wounds of neck
S11.70o Multiple open wounds of neck, uncomplicated
S11.71o Multiple open wounds of neck, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S11.8 Open wound of other parts of neck
S11.80o Open wound of other parts of neck, uncomplicated
S11.81o Open wound of other parts of neck, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S11.9 Open wound of neck, part unspecified
S11.90o Open wound of neck, part unspecified, uncomplicated
S11.91o Open wound of neck, part unspecified, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S12
S12.801
Fracture of neck
Includes:
cervical:
•
neural arch
•
spine
•
spinous process
•
transverse process
•
vertebra
•
vertebral arch
Use additional codes to identify any spinal injury (S14.--)
S12.0 Fracture of first cervical vertebra
S12.000 Fracture of first cervical vertebra, closed
S12.001 Fracture of first cervical vertebra, open
S12.1 Fracture of second cervical vertebra
     Includes:
    odontoid bone
S12.100 Fracture of second cervical vertebra, closed
S12.101 Fracture of second cervical vertebra, open
S12.2 Fracture of other specified cervical vertebra
     Excludes:
    Multiple fractures of cervical spine (S12.7)
S12.2 Fracture of other specified cervical closed Open
vertebra 
S12.20 Fracture of C3 - C4 vertebra S12.200o S12.201o
S12.21 Fracture of C5 - C7 vertebra S12.210o S12.211o
S12.7 Multiple fractures of cervical spine
S12.700 Multiple fractures of cervical spine, closed
S12.701 Multiple fractures of cervical spine, open
S12.8 Fracture of other parts of neck
     Includes:
    Hyoid bone
   Larynx
  Thyroid cartilage
 Trachea
S12.800 Fracture of other parts of neck, closed
S12.801 Fracture of other parts of neck, open
777
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S12.9 Fracture of neck, part unspecified
     Includes:
    Fracture of cervical:
   •
    spine NOS
   •
    vertebra NOS
S12.900 Fracture of neck, part unspecified, closed
S12.901 Fracture of neck, part unspecified, open
S12.9
S13
Dislocation, sprain and strain of joints and ligaments at neck level
Excludes:
rupture or displacement (nontraumatic) of cervical intervertebral disc (M50.-)
S13.0 Traumatic rupture of cervical intervertebral disc
S13.1 Dislocation of cervical vertebra
     Includes:
    Cervical spine NOS
S13.2 Dislocation of other and unspecified parts of neck
S13.3 Multiple dislocations of neck
S13.4 Sprain and strain of cervical spine
     Includes:
    Anterior longitudinal (ligament), cervical
   Atlanto-axial (joints)
  Atlanto-occipital (joints)
S13.40o Whiplash associated disorder [WAD1] with complaint of neck pain, stiffness or tenderness
       only
      Includes:
     No physical signs
    Whiplash NOS
S13.41o Whiplash associated disorder [WAD2] with complaint of neck pain with musculoskeletal signs
       Includes:
      Decreased range of motion and point tenderness
S13.42o Whiplash associated disorder [WAD3] with complaint of neck pain with neurological signs
       Includes:
      Decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes, weakness and sensory deficits
S13.48o Other sprain and strain of cervical spine
S13.5 Sprain and strain of thyroid region
     Includes:
    Cricoarytenoid (joint)(ligament)
   Cricothyroid (joint)(ligament)
  Thyroid cartilage
S13.6 Sprain and strain of joints and ligaments of other and unspecified parts of neck
S14
Injury of nerves and spinal cord at neck level
S14.0 Concussion and oedema of cervical spinal cord
S14.1 Other unspecified injuries of cervical spinal cord
     Includes:
    Injury of cervical spinal cord NOS
S14.10o Complete lesion of cervical spinal cord
S14.11o Central cord lesion of cervical spinal cord
S14.12o Anterior cord syndrome of cervical spinal cord
S14.13o Posterior cord syndrome of cervical spinal cord
S14.18o Other injuries of cervical spinal cord
       Includes:
      Incomplete spinal cord lesion
S14.19o Unspecified lesion of cervical spinal cord
S14.2 Injury of nerve root of cervical spine
S14.20o Laceration of nerve root of cervical spine
S14.28o Other and unspecified injury of nerve root of cervical spine
778
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S14.3 Injury of brachial plexus
S14.30o Laceration of brachial plexus
S14.38o Other and unspecified injury of brachial plexus
S14.4 Injury of peripheral nerves of neck
S14.40o Laceration of peripheral nerves of neck
S14.48o Other and unspecified injury of peripheral nerves of neck
S14.5 Injury of cervical sympathetic nerves
S14.50o Laceration of cervical sympathetic nerves
S14.58o Other and unspecified injury of cervical sympathetic nerves
S14.6 Injury of other and unspecified nerves of neck
S14.60o Laceration and other and unspecified nerves of neck
S14.68o Other and unspecified injury of other and unspecified nerves of neck
S15
S19.9
Injury of blood vessels at neck level
S15.0 Injury of carotid artery
     Includes:
    Carotid artery (common) (external) (internal)
S15.1 Injury of vertebral artery
S15.2 Injury of external jugular vein
S15.3 Injury of internal jugular vein
S15.7 Injury of multiple blood vessels at neck level
S15.8 Injury of other blood vessels at neck level
S15.9 Injury of unspecified blood vessel at neck level
S16
Injury of muscle and tendon at neck level
S16.0o Laceration of muscle and tendon at neck level
S16.8o Other and unspecified injury of muscle and tendon at neck level
S17
Crushing injury of neck
S17.0 Crushing injury of larynx and trachea
S17.8 Crushing injury of other parts of neck
S17.9 Crushing injury of neck, part unspecified
S18
Traumatic amputation at neck level
Includes:
S19
Decapitation
Other and unspecified injuries of neck
S19.7 Multiple injuries of neck
     Includes:
    Injuries classifiable to more than one of the categories (S10-S18)
S19.8 Other specified injuries of neck
S19.9 Unspecified injury of neck
779
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S20
Injuries to the thorax
(S20-S29)
Includes:
Excludes:
S20
injuries of:
•
breast
•
chest (wall)
•
interscapular area
burns and corrosions (T20-T32)
effects of foreign body in:
•
bronchus (T17.5)
•
lung (T17.8)
•
oesophagus (T18.1)
•
trachea (T17.4)
fracture of spine NOS (T08)
frostbite (T33-T35)
injuries of:
•
axilla (S40-S49)
•
clavicle (S40-S49)
•
scapular region (S40-S49)
•
shoulder (S40-S49)
•
trunk NOS (T09.-)
insect bite or sting, venomous (T63.4)
Superficial injury of thorax
S20.0 Contusion of breast
S20.1 Other and unspecified superficial injuries of breast
S20.2 Contusion of thorax
S20.3 Other superficial injuries of front wall of thorax
S20.4 Other superficial injuries of back wall of thorax
S20.7 Multiple superficial injuries of thorax
S20.8 Superficial injury of other and unspecified parts of thorax
     Includes:
    Thoracic wall NOS
S21
Open wound of thorax
Excludes:
traumatic:
•
haemopneumothorax (S27.2)
•
haemothorax (S27.1)
•
pneumothorax (S27.0)
S21.0 Open wound of breast
S21.00o Open wound of breast, uncomplicated
S21.01o Open wound of breast, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S21.1 Open wound of front wall of thorax
S21.10o Open wound of front wall of thorax, uncomplicated
S21.11o Open wound of front wall of thorax, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S21.2 Open wound of back wall of thorax
S21.20o Open wound of back wall of thorax, uncomplicated
S21.21o Open wound of back wall of thorax, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S21.7 Multiple open wounds of thoracic wall
S21.70o Multiple open wounds of thoracic wall, uncomplicated
780
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S21.71o Multiple open wounds of thoracic wall, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S21.8 Open wound of other parts of thorax
S21.80o Open wound of other parts of thorax, uncomplicated
S21.81o Open wound of other parts of thorax, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S21.9 Open wound of thorax, part unspecified
     Includes:
    Thoracic wall NOS
   Excludes:
  traumatic:
 •
  hemothorax (S27.1)
 •
  pneumothorax (S27.0)
S21.90o Open wound of thorax, part unspecified, uncomplicated
S21.91o Open wound of thorax, part unspecified, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S22
S22.301
Fracture of rib(s), sternum and thoracic spine
Includes:
thoracic:
•
neural arch
•
spinous process
•
transverse process
•
vertebra
•
vertebral arch
Use additional codes to identify any spinal injury (S24.1-)
Excludes:
fracture of:
•
clavicle (S42.0)
•
scapula (S42.1)
S22.0
Fracture of thoracic vertebra
Includes:
Fracture of thoracic spine
S22.0 Fracture of thoracic vertebra Closed Open
S22.00 Fracture of thoracic vertebra T1 - T6 S22.000o S22.001o
S22.01 Fracture of thoracic vertebra T7- T12 S22.010o S22.011o
S22.09 Fracture of unspecified thoracic S22.090o S22.091o
vertebra 
S22.1 Multiple fractures of thoracic spine
S22.100 Multiple fractures of thoracic spine, closed
S22.101 Multiple fractures of thoracic spine, open
S22.2 Fracture of sternum
S22.200 Fracture of sternum, closed
S22.201 Fracture of sternum, open
S22.3 Fracture of rib
S22.300 Fracture of rib, closed
S22.301 Fracture of rib, open
781
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S22.4
S22.4
Multiple fractures of ribs
S22.4 Multiple fractures of ribs
Closed open
S22.40 Multiple fractures of 2 - 4 ribs S22.400o S22.401o
S22.41 Multiple fractures of 5 or more ribs S22.410o S22.411o
S22.49 Multiple fractures of unspecified S22.490o S22.491o
number of ribs 
S22.5 Flail chest
S22.500 Flail chest, closed
S22.501 Flail chest, open
S22.8 Fracture of other parts of bony thorax
S22.800 Fracture of other parts of bony thorax, closed
S22.801 Fracture of other parts of bony thorax, open
S22.9 Fracture of bony thorax, part unspecified
S22.900 Fracture of bony thorax, part unspecified, closed
S22.901 Fracture of bony thorax, part unspecified, open
S23
Dislocation, sprain and strain of joints and ligaments of thorax
Excludes:
dislocation, sprain and strain of sternoclavicular joint (S43.2, S43.6)
rupture or displacement (nontraumatic) of thoracic intervertebral disc (M51.-)
S23.0 Traumatic rupture of thoracic intervertebral disc
S23.1 Dislocation of thoracic vertebra
     Includes:
    Thoracic spine NOS
S23.2 Dislocation of other and unspecified parts of thorax
S23.3 Sprain and strain of thoracic spine
S23.4 Sprain and strain of ribs and sternum
S23.5 Sprain and strain of other and unspecified parts of thorax
S24
Injury of nerves and spinal cord at thorax level
Excludes:
injury of brachial plexus (S14.3)
S24.0 Concussion and oedema of thoracic spinal cord
S24.1 Other and unspecified injuries of thoracic spinal cord
S24.10o Complete lesion of thoracic spinal cord
S24.11o Central cord lesion of thoracic spinal cord
S24.12o Anterior cord syndrome of thoracic spinal cord
S24.13o Posterior cord syndrome of thoracic spinal cord
S24.18o Other injuries of thoracic spinal cord
       Includes:
      Incomplete spinal cord lesion
S24.19o Unspecified lesion of thoracic spinal cord
S24.2 Injury of nerve root of thoracic spine
S24.20o Laceration of nerve root of thoracic spine
S24.28o Other and unspecified injury of nerve root of thoracic spine
S24.3 Injury of peripheral nerves of thorax
S24.30o Laceration of peripheral nerves of thorax
S24.38o Other and unspecified injury of peripheral nerves of thorax
782
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S24.4
Injury of thoracic sympathetic nerves
Includes:
Cardiac plexus
Oesophageal plexus
Pulmonary plexus
Stellate ganglion
Thoracic sympathetic ganglion
S26.001
S24.40o Laceration of thoracic sympathetic nerves
S24.48o Other and unspecified injury to thoracic sympathetic nerves
S24.5 Injury of other nerves of thorax
S24.50o Laceration of other nerves of thorax
S24.58o Other and unspecified injury of other nerves of thorax
S24.6 Injury of unspecified nerve of thorax
S24.60o Laceration of unspecified nerve of thorax
S24.68o Other and unspecified injury of unspecified nerve of thorax
S25
Injury of blood vessels of thorax
S25.0 Injury of thoracic aorta
     Includes:
    Aorta NOS
S25.1 Injury of innominate or subclavian artery
S25.2 Injury of superior vena cava
     Includes:
    Vena cava NOS
S25.3 Injury of innominate or subclavian vein
S25.4 Injury of pulmonary blood vessels
S25.5 Injury of intercostal blood vessels
S25.7 Injury of multiple blood vessels of thorax
S25.8 Injury of other blood vessels of thorax
     Includes:
    Azygos vein
   Mammary artery or vein
S25.9 Injury of unspecified blood vessel of thorax
S26
Injury of heart
Includes:
contusion
laceration
puncture
traumatic rupture
of heart
S26.0 Injury of heart with haemopericardium
S26.000 Injury of heart with haemopericardium, without open wound into thoracic cavity
S26.001 Injury of heart with haemopericardium, with open wound into thoracic cavity
783
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S26.8
S26.8
Other injuries of heart
S26.8 Other injuries of heart Without open wound into With open wound into thoracic
                              thoracic cavity cavity
S26.80 Contusion and haematoma of heart S26.800o S26.801o
S26.81 Laceration and puncture of heart S26.810o S26.811o
S26.88 Other injury of heart S26.880o S26.881o
S26.89 Unspecified injury of heart S26.890o S26.891o
Includes
• Minor, moderate, major lacerations, puncture, traumatic
rupture
S27
Injury of other and unspecified intrathoracic organs
Excludes:
injury of:
•
cervical oesophagus (S10-S19)
•
trachea (cervical) (S10-S19)
S27.0 Traumatic pneumothorax
S27.000 Traumatic pneumothorax, without open wound into thoracic cavity
S27.001 Traumatic pneumothorax, with open wound into thoracic cavity
S27.1 Traumatic haemothorax
S27.100 Traumatic haemothorax, without open wound into thoracic cavity
S27.101 Traumatic haemothorax, with open wound into thoracic cavity
S27.2 Traumatic haemopneumothorax
S27.200 Traumatic haemopneumothorax, without open wound into thoracic cavity
S27.201 Traumatic haemopneumothorax, with open wound into thoracic cavity
S27.3 Other injuries of lung
S27.3 Other injuries of lung
Without open wound into
thoracic cavity
With open wound into thoracic
cavity
S27.30 Contusion and haematoma of lung S27.300o S27.301o
S27.31 Laceration and puncture of lung S27.310o S27.311o
S27.38 Other injury of lung S27.380o S27.381o
S27.39 Unspecified injury of lung S27.390o S27.391o
Without open wound into With open wound into thoracic
thoracic cavity cavity
Includes
• Minor, moderate, major lacerations, puncture, traumatic
rupture
S27.4
Injury of bronchus
S27.4 Injury of bronchus
S27.40 Contusion and haematoma of bronchus S27.400o S27.401o
S27.410o S27.411o
S27.48 Other injury of bronchus S27.480o S27.481o
S27.49 Unspecified injury of bronchus S27.490o S27.491o
S27.41 Laceration and puncture of bronchus
Includes
• Minor, moderate, major lacerations, puncture, traumatic
rupture
784
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S27.5
Injury of thoracic trachea
S27.5 Injury of thoracic trachea Without open wound into With open wound into thoracic
                                 thoracic cavity cavity
S27.50 Contusion and haematoma of thoracic S27.500o S27.501o
trachea 
S27.51 Laceration and puncture of thoracic S27.510o S27.511o
trachea 
S27.58 Other injury of thoracic trachea S27.580o S27.581o
S27.59 Unspecified injury of thoracic trachea S27.590o S27.591o
S27.6 Injury of pleura Without open wound into With open wound into thoracic
                       thoracic cavity cavity
S27.60 Contusion and haematoma of pleura S27.600o S27.601o
S27.61 Laceration and puncture of pleura S27.610o S27.611o
S27.68 Other injury of pleura S27.680o S27.681o
S27.69 Unspecified injury of pleura S27.690o S27.691o
Includes
• Minor, moderate, major lacerations, puncture, traumatic
rupture
S27.6
Injury of pleura
Includes
• Minor, moderate, major lacerations, puncture, traumatic
rupture
S27.7
Multiple injuries of intrathoracic organs
S27.7 Multiple injuries of intrathoracic
organs
Without open wound into
thoracic cavity
With open wound into thoracic
cavity
S27.70 Multiple contusions and haematomas of S27.700o S27.701o
intrathoracic organs 
S27.710o S27.711o
S27.78 Other multiple and combined injuries of S27.780o S27.781o
intrathoracic organs 
S27.79 Unspecified multiple injuries of S27.791o
intrathoracic organs 
S27.71 Multiple lacerations and punctures of
intrathoracic organs
Includes
• Minor, moderate, major lacerations, puncture, traumatic
rupture
S27.790o
785
S27.7
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S27.8
S27.8
Injury of other specified intrathoracic organs
Includes:
Diaphragm
Esophagus (thoracic part)
Lymphatic thoracic duct
Thymus gland
Traumatic pleural effusion
S27.8 Injury of other specified Without open wound into With open wound into thoracic
intrathoracic organs thoracic cavity cavity
S27.80 Laceration of diaphragm S27.800o S27.801o
S27.810o S27.811o
S27.840o S27.841o
S27.85 Other and unspecified injury of S27.850o S27.851o
diaphragm 
S27.86 Other and unspecified injury of S27.860o S27.861o
oesophagus 
S27.89 Other and unspecified injury of other S27.890o S27.891o
specified intrathoracic organs 
Includes
• Minor, moderate, major lacerations, puncture, traumatic
rupture
S27.81 Laceration of oesophagus
Includes
• Minor, moderate, major lacerations, puncture, traumatic
rupture
S27.84 Laceration of other specified
intrathoracic organs
Includes
• Minor, moderate, major lacerations, puncture, traumatic
rupture
786
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S27.9
Injury of unspecified intrathoracic organ
S27.9 Injury of unspecified intrathoracic
organ
Without open wound into
thoracic cavity
With open wound into thoracic
cavity
S27.90 Laceration of unspecified intrathoracic S27.900o S27.901o
organs 
S27.98 Other and unspecified injury of S27.981o
unspecified intrathoracic organs 
S28
S27.980o
Crushing injury of thorax and traumatic amputation of part of thorax
S28.0 Crushed chest
     Excludes:
    flail chest (S22.5)
S28.1 Traumatic amputation of part of thorax
     Excludes:
    transection of thorax (T05.8)
S29
Other and unspecified injuries of thorax
S29.0 Injury of muscle and tendon at thorax level
S29.00o Laceration of muscle and tendon at thorax level
S29.08o Other and unspecified injury of muscle and tendon at thorax level
S29.7 Multiple injuries of thorax
     Includes:
    Injuries classifiable to more than one of the categories S20-S29.0
S29.8 Other specified injuries of thorax
S29.9 Unspecified injury of thorax
787
S29.9
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S30
Injuries to the abdomen, lower back, lumbar spine and pelvis
(S30-S39)
Includes:
Excludes:
S30
abdominal wall
anus
buttock
external genitalia
flank
groin
burns and corrosions (T20-T32)
effects of foreign body in:
•
anus and rectum (T18.5)
•
genitourinary tract (T19.-)
•
stomach, small intestine and colon (T18.2-T18.4)
fracture of spine NOS (T08)
frostbite (T33-T35)
injuries of:
•
back NOS (T09.-)
•
trunk (T09.-)
insect bite or sting, venomous (T63.4)
Superficial injury of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
Excludes:
superficial injury of hip (S70.-)
S30.0 Contusion of lower back and pelvis
     Includes:
    Buttock
S30.1 Contusion of abdominal wall
     Includes:
    Flank
   Groin
S30.2 Contusion of external genital organs
     Includes:
    Labium (majus)(minus)
   Penis
  Perineum
 Scrotum
Testis
Vagina
Vulva
S30.20o Contusion of penis
S30.21o Contusion of scrotum and testes
S30.22o Contusion of vagina and vulva
       Includes:
      Labia
S30.28o Contusion of other external genital organs
       Includes:
      Perineum
S30.29o Contusion of unspecified external genital organs
S30.7 Multiple superficial injuries of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
     Includes:
    Multiple superficial injuries of abdomen, lower back, pelvis and external genital organs
S30.8 Other superficial injuries of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
S30.80o Other superficial injuries of lower back and pelvis
       Includes:
      buttock
S30.81o Other superficial injuries of abdominal wall
       Includes:
      flank, groin
S30.82o Other superficial injuries of penis
S30.83o Other superficial injuries of scrotum and testes
788
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S30.84o Other superficial injuries of vagina and vulva
       Includes:
      labia
S30.85o Other superficial injuries of other external genital organs
       Includes:
      perineum
S30.88o Other superficial injuries of abdomen, lower back and pelvis NOS
       Excludes:
      Multiple superficial injuries (S30.7)
S30.9 Superficial injury of abdomen, lower back and pelvis, part unspecified
S31
S31.301o
Open wound of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
Excludes:
open wound of hip (S71.0)
traumatic amputation of part of abdomen, lower back and pelvis (S38.2-S38.3)
S31.0 Open wound of lower back and pelvis
     Includes:
    Buttock
S31.000o Open wound of lower back and pelvis, uncomplicated
S31.001o Open wound of lower back and pelvis, complicated
        Includes:
       Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S31.1 Open wound of abdominal wall
     Includes:
    Flank
   Groin
S31.1 Open wound of abdominal wall Uncomplicated Complicated
S31.10 Open wound of upper abdominal wall S31.100o S31.101o
Includes
• Wounds with mention of delayed healing,
delayed treatment, foreign body or major
infection
S31.11 Open wound of epigastric region of
abdominal wall
S31.110o
S31.111o
Includes
• Wounds with mention of delayed healing,
delayed treatment, foreign body or major
infection
S31.12 Open wound of periumbilical region of S31.120o S31.121o
abdominal wall 
S31.13 Open wound of lower abdominal wall S31.131o
S31.130o
Includes
• Wounds with mention of delayed healing,
delayed treatment, foreign body or major
infection
Includes
• Wounds with mention of delayed healing,
delayed treatment, foreign body or major
infection
S31.19 Open wound of unspecified site of
abdominal wall
S31.190o
S31.191o
Includes
• Wounds with mention of delayed healing,
delayed treatment, foreign body or major
infection
S31.2 Open wound of penis
S31.200o Open wound of penis, uncomplicated
S31.201o Open wound of penis, complicated
        Includes:
       Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S31.3 Open wound of scrotum and testes
S31.300o Open wound of scrotum and testes, uncomplicated
S31.301o Open wound of scrotum and testes, complicated
        Includes:
       Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
789
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S31.4 
S31.4
Open wound of vagina and vulva
S31.400o Open wound of vagina and vulva, uncomplicated
S31.401o Open wound of vagina and vulva, complicated
        Includes:
       Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S31.5 Open wound of other and unspecified external genital organs
     Excludes:
    traumatic amputation of external genital organs (S38.2)
S31.500o Open wound of other and unspecified external genital organs, uncomplicated
S31.501o Open wound of other and unspecified external genital organs, complicated
        Includes:
       Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S31.7 Multiple open wounds of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
S31.700o Multiple open wounds of abdomen, lower back and pelvis, uncomplicated
S31.701o Multiple open wounds of abdomen, lower back and pelvis, complicated
        Includes:
       Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S31.8 Open wound of other and unspecified parts of abdomen
S31.800o Open wound of other and unspecified parts of abdomen, uncomplicated
S31.801o Open wound of other and unspecified parts of abdomen, complicated
        Includes:
       Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S32
Fracture of lumbar spine and pelvis
Includes:
lumbosacral:
•
neural arch
•
spinous process
•
transverse process
•
vertebra
•
vertebral arch
Use additional codes to identify any spinal cord injury (S34.1)
Excludes:
fracture of hip NOS (S72.0)
S32.0
Fracture of lumbar vertebra
Includes:
Fracture of lumbar spine
S32.0 Fracture of lumbar vertebra Closed Open
S32.00 Fracture of lumbar vertebra, L1 level S32.000o S32.001o
S32.01 Fracture of lumbar vertebra, L2 level S32.010o S32.011o
S32.02 Fracture of lumbar vertebra, L3 level S32.020o S32.021o
S32.03 Fracture of lumbar vertebra, L4 level S32.030o S32.031o
S32.04 Fracture of lumbar vertebra, L5 level S32.040o S32.041o
S32.09 Fracture of lumbar vertebra, unspecified S32.090o S32.091o
level 
S32.1 Fracture of sacrum
S32.100 Fracture of sacrum, closed
S32.101 Fracture of sacrum, open
S32.2 Fracture of coccyx
S32.200 Fracture of coccyx, closed
S32.201 Fracture of coccyx, open
S32.3 Fracture of ilium
     Includes:
    iliac
S32.300 Fracture of ilium, closed
S32.301 Fracture of ilium, open
790
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S32.4 Fracture of acetabulum
S32.400 Fracture of acetabulum, closed
S32.401 Fracture of acetabulum, open
S32.5 Fracture of pubis
     Includes:
    pubis-superior, inferior rami
S32.500 Fracture of pubis, closed
S32.501 Fracture of pubis, open
S32.7 Multiple fractures of lumbar spine and pelvis
S32.700 Multiple fractures of lumbar spine and pelvis, closed
S32.701 Multiple fractures of lumbar spine and pelvis, open
S32.8 Fracture of other and unspecified parts of lumbar spine and pelvis
     Includes:
    Fracture of:
   •
    ischium
   •
    lumbosacral spine NOS
   •
    pelvis NOS
S32.800 Fracture of other and unspecified parts of lumbar spine and pelvis, closed
S32.801 Fracture of other and unspecified parts of lumbar spine and pelvis, open
S33
S34.28o
Dislocation, sprain and strain of joints and ligaments of lumbar spine and
pelvis
Excludes:
dislocation, sprain and strain of joint and ligaments of hip (S73.-)
obstetric damage to pelvic joints and ligaments (O71.6)
rupture or displacement (nontraumatic) of lumbar intervertebral disc (M51.-)
S33.0 Traumatic rupture of lumbar intervertebral disc
S33.1 Dislocation of lumbar vertebra
     Includes:
    Dislocation of lumbar spine NOS
S33.2 Dislocation of sacroiliac and sacrococcygeal joint
S33.3 Dislocation of other and unspecified parts of lumbar spine and pelvis
S33.4 Traumatic rupture of symphysis pubis
S33.5 Sprain and strain of lumbar spine
S33.6 Sprain and strain of sacroiliac joint
S33.7 Sprain and strain of other and unspecified parts of lumbar spine and pelvis
S34
Injury of nerves and lumbar spinal cord at abdomen, lower back and pelvis
level
S34.0 Concussion and oedema of lumbar spinal cord
S34.1 Other injury of lumbar spinal cord
S34.10o Complete lesion of lumbar spinal cord
S34.11o Central cord lesion of lumbar spinal cord
S34.12o Anterior cord syndrome of lumbar spinal cord
S34.13o Posterior cord syndrome of lumbar spinal cord
S34.18o Other injuries of lumbar spinal cord
       Includes:
      Incomplete spinal cord lesion
S34.19o Unspecified lesion of lumbar spinal cord
S34.2 Injury of nerve root of lumbar spinal cord
S34.20o Laceration of nerve root of lumbar and sacral spine
S34.28o Other and unspecified injury of nerve root of lumbar and sacral spine
791
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S34.3 
S34.3
Injury of cauda equina
S34.30o Laceration of cauda equina
S34.38o Other and unspecified injury of cauda equina
S34.4 Injury of lumbosacral plexus
S34.40o Laceration of lumbosacral plexus
S34.48o Other and unspecified injury of lumbosacral plexus
S34.5 Injury of lumbar, sacral and pelvic sympathetic nerves
     Includes:
    Coeliac ganglion or plexus
   Hypogastric plexus
  Mesenteric plexus (inferior)(superior)
 Splanchnic nerve
S34.50o Laceration of lumbar, sacral and pelvic sympathetic nerves
S34.58o Other and unspecified injury of lumbar, sacral and pelvic sympathetic nerves
S34.6 Injury of peripheral nerve(s) of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
S34.60o Laceration of peripheral nerve(s) of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
S34.68o Other and unspecified injury of peripheral nerve(s) of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
S34.8 Injury of other and unspecified nerves at abdomen, lower back and pelvis level
S34.80o Laceration of other and unspecified nerves at abdomen, lower back and pelvis level
S34.88o Other and unspecified injury of other and unspecified nerves at abdomen, lower back and
       pelvis level
S35
Injury of blood vessels at abdomen, lower back and pelvis level
S35.0 Injury of abdominal aorta
     Excludes:
    aorta NOS (S25.0)
S35.1 Injury of inferior vena cava
     Includes:
    Hepatic vein
   Excludes:
  vena cava NOS (S25.2)
S35.2 Injury of coeliac or mesenteric artery
     Includes:
    Gastric artery
   Gastroduodenal artery
  Hepatic artery
 Mesenteric artery (inferior)(superior)
Splenic artery
S35.3 Injury of portal or splenic vein
     Includes:
    Mesenteric vein (inferior)(superior)
S35.4 Injury of renal blood vessels
     Includes:
    Renal artery or vein
S35.5 Injury of iliac blood vessels
     Includes:
    Hypogastric artery or vein
   Iliac artery or vein
  Uterine artery or vein
S35.7 Injury of multiple blood vessels at abdomen, lower back and pelvis level
S35.8 Injury of other blood vessels at abdomen, lower back and pelvis level
     Includes:
    Ovarian artery or vein
S35.9 Injury of unspecified blood vessel at abdomen, lower back and pelvis level
792
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S36
S36.0
Injury of intra-abdominal organs
S36.0
Injury of spleen
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration, rupture of spleen with or without open wound into abdominal
cavity
S36.0 Injury of spleen
Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S36.00 Subcapsular haematoma (less than 10% S36.000o S36.001o
of surface area involvement) or capsular 
laceration of less than 1cm parenchymal depth 
(Grade 1) 
S36.01 Subcapsular hematoma involving 10% S36.010o S36.011o
to 50% of surface, or capsular laceration of 1 to 
3 cm parenchymal depth but not involving 
trabecular vessel (Grade II) 
S36.020o S36.021o
S36.02 Subcapsular haematoma involving 
>50% of surface, or intraparenchymal 
haematoma > 5cm, capsular laceration > 3cm or 
involving trabecular vessel (Grade III) 
S36.03 Laceration involving segmental or hilar S36.030o S36.031o
vessels causing major devascularization :> 25 % 
of spleen (Grade IV) 
S36.04 Hilar vascular laceration resulting in S36.040o S36.041o
completely shattered spleen (Grade V) 
S36.09 Haematoma NOS, laceration NOS, S36.090o S36.091o
injury to spleen NOS 
793
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S36.1
S36.1
Injury of liver or gallbladder
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration, rupture of liver and/or gallbladder with or without open
wound into abdominal cavity
S36.1 Injury of liver or gallbladder Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S36.10 Subcapsular liver haematoma (less than S36.100o
10% of surface area involvement) or capsular 
laceration of less than 1cm parenchymal depth 
(Grade 1) 
S36.101o
S36.11 Subcapsular liver hematoma involving S36.110o
10% to 50% of surface, or capsular laceration of
1 to 3 cm parenchymal depth and less than 10cm
in length (Grade II)
S36.111o
S36.12 Subcapsular liver haematoma involving S36.120o
greater than 50% of surface, or intraparenchymal
haematoma greater than 10cm, capsular
laceration greater than 3cm in depth (Grade III)
S36.121o
S36.13 Parenchymal liver disruption involving S36.130o
25 to 75% hepatic lobe, or 1 to three segments 
(Grade IV) 
S36.131o
S36.14 Parenchymal liver disruption involving S36.140o
greater than 75% of hepatic lobe or more than 3
segments. (Grade V)
S36.141o
S36.15 Liver haematoma NOS, laceration NOS, S36.150o
injury to liver NOS
S36.151o
S36.16 Gallbladder injury, haematoma S36.160o
S36.161o
S36.17 Gallbladder laceration without bile duct S36.170o
injury 
S36.171o
S36.18 Gallbladder laceration with bile duct S36.180o
injury 
S36.181o
S36.19 Injury to gallbladder NOS S36.190o
S36.191o
Includes
• Injury to bile duct NOS
S36.2
Injury of pancreas
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration, rupture of pancreas with or without open wound into
abdominal cavity
S36.2 Injury of pancreas Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S36.20 Haematoma of pancreas (without S36.200o
pancreatic duct injury) 
S36.201o
S36.21 Haematoma of pancreas with pancreatic S36.210o
duct injury or laceration (without pancreatic duct
injury)
S36.211o
S36.22 Laceration with pancreatic duct injury S36.220o
or laceration involving body or tail of pancreas 
S36.221o
S36.23 Parenchymal injury (or transection) S36.230o
involving ampulla of vater but not pancreatic 
head 
S36.231o
S36.24 Laceration involving pancreatic head S36.240o
(with or without duct injury) 
S36.241o
S36.29 Injury of pancreas NOS S36.290o
S36.291o
794
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S36.3
Injury of stomach
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration, rupture of stomach with or without open wound into
abdominal cavity
Injury of abdominal (portion of) oesophagus
S36.3 Injury of stomach Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S36.30 Haematoma of stomach S36.300o
S36.301o
S36.31 Laceration of stomach S36.310o
S36.311o
S36.39 Injury NOS of stomach S36.390o
S36.6
S36.391o
S36.4
Injury of small intestine
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration, rupture of small instestine with or without open wound into
abdominal cavity
jejunum and ileum
Use additional code(s) to identify any associated pancreatic injury (S36.2)
S36.4 Injury of small intestine Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S36.40 Haematoma of duodenum S36.400o
S36.401o
S36.41 Laceration of duodenum (without bile S36.410o
duct injury) 
S36.411o
S36.42 Laceration of duodenum with bile duct S36.420o
orr duodenopancreatic complex injury
S36.421o
S36.45 Haematoma of small intestine, S36.450o
excluding duodenum 
S36.451o
S36.46 Laceration of small intestine, excluding S36.460o
duodenum
S36.461o
S36.49 Injury NOS of small intestine S36.491o
S36.5
S36.490o
Injury of colon
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration, rupture of large instestine with or without open wound into
abdominal cavity
S36.5 Injury of colon Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S36.50 Haematoma of colon S36.500o
S36.501o
S36.51 Laceration of colon S36.510o
S36.511o
S36.59 Injury NOS of colon S36.590o
S36.591o
S36.6
Injury of rectum
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration, rupture of rectum with or without open wound into
abdominal cavity
S36.6 Injury of rectum Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S36.60 Haematoma of recturm S36.600o
S36.601o
S36.61 Laceration of rectum S36.610o
S36.611o
S36.69 Injury NOS of rectum S36.690o
S36.691o
795
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S36.7
S36.7
Injury of multiple intra-abdominal organs
S36.7 Injury of multiple intra-abdominal
organs
Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S36.70 Haematoma of multiple intra-abdominal S36.700o S36.701o
organs 
S36.71 Laceration of multiple intra-abdominal S36.710o S36.711o
organs 
S36.78 Other injury of multiple intra-abdominal S36.780o S36.781o
organs 
S36.79 Injury NOS of multiple intra-abdominal S36.790o S36.791o
organs 
S36.8
Injury of other intra-abdominal organs
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration, rupture of other intra-abdominal organs with or without open
wound into abdominal cavity
Laceration of visceral peritoneum
Peritoneum
Retroperitoneum
S36.8 Injury of other intra-abdominal Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
organs 
S36.80 Haematoma of other intra-abdominal S36.800o
organs 
S36.801o
S36.81 Laceration of other intra-abdominal S36.810o
organs 
S36.811o
S36.89 Injury NOS of other intra-abdominal S36.890o
organs 
S36.891o
S36.9
Injury of unspecified intra-abdominal organ
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration, rupture of other intra-abdominal organs with or without open
wound into abdominal cavity
Excludes:
Multiple intra-abdominal organ injuries (S36.7)
S36.9 Injury of unspecified intra- Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
abdominal organ 
S36.90 Haematoma of unpsecified intra- S36.900o
abdominal organ 
S36.901o
S36.91 Laceration of unspecified intra- S36.910o
abdominal organ 
S36.911o
S36.99 Injury NOS of unspecified intra- S36.990o
abdominal organ 
S36.991o
796
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S37
Injury of urinary and pelvic organs
Excludes:
S37.0
peritoneum and retroperitoneum (S36.8)
S37.4
Injury of kidney
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration or rupture of kidney with or without open wound into
abdominal/pelvic cavity
S37.0 Injury of kidney Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S37.00 Haematoma of kidney S37.000o
S37.001o
S37.01 Laceration of kidney (without urinary S37.010o
extrasvasation) 
S37.011o
S37.02 Laceration of kidney with urinary S37.020o
extravasation or parenchymal laceration 
extending through renal cortex, medulla 
and collecting system 
S37.021o
S37.03 Completely shattered kidney or avulsion S37.030o
or renal hilum resulting in devascularization
S37.031o
S37.09 Injury of kidney NOS S37.091o
S37.1
S37.090o
Injury of ureter
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration or rupture of ureter with or without open wound into
abdominal/pelvic cavity
S37.1 Injury of ureter Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S37.10 Haematoma of ureter S37.100o
S37.101o
S37.11 Laceration of ureter S37.110o
S37.111o
S37.19 Injury of NOS ureter S37.190o
S37.191o
S37.2
Injury of bladder
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration or rupture of bladder with or without open wound into
abdominal/pelvic cavity
S37.2 Injury of bladder Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S37.20 Haematoma of bladder S37.200o
S37.201o
S37.21 Laceration of bladder S37.210o
S37.211o
S37.29 Injury NOS of bladder S37.290o
S37.291o
S37.3
Injury of urethra
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration or rupture of urethra with or without open wound into
abdominal/pelvic cavity
S37.3 Injury of urethra Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S37.30 Haematoma of urethra S37.300o
S37.301o
S37.31 Laceration of urethra S37.310o
S37.311o
S37.39 Injury NOS of urethra S37.390o
S37.391o
S37.4
Injury of ovary
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration or rupture of ovary with or without open wound into
abdominal/pelvic cavity
S37.4 Injury of ovary
Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S37.40 Haematoma of ovary S37.400o S37.401o
S37.41 Laceration of ovary S37.410o S37.411o
S37.49 Injury NOS of ovary S37.490o S37.491o
797
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S37.5
S37.5
Injury of fallopian tube
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration or rupture of fallopian tube with or without open wound into
abdominal/pelvic cavity
S37.5 Injury of fallopian tube Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S37.50 Haematoma of fallopian tube S37.500o
S37.501o
S37.51 Laceration of fallopian tube S37.510o
S37.511o
S37.59 Injury NOS of fallopian tube S37.590o
S37.591o
S37.6
Injury of uterus
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration or rupture of uterus with or without open wound into
abdominal/pelvic cavity
Excludes:
obstetrical rupture of uterus (O71.-)
S37.6 Injury of uterus Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S37.60 Haematoma of uterus S37.600o
S37.601o
S37.61 Laceration of uterus S37.610o
S37.611o
S37.69 Injury NOS of uterus S37.690o
S37.691o
S37.7
Injury of multiple pelvic organs
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration or rupture of multiple genitourinary organs with or without
open wound into abdominal/pelvic cavity
S37.7 Injury of multiple pelvic organs Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S37.70 Haematoma of multiple pelvic organs S37.700o
S37.701o
S37.71 Laceration of multiple pelvic organs S37.710o
S37.711o
S37.79 Injury NOS of multiple pelvic organs S37.790o
S37.791o
S37.8
Injury of other pelvic organs
Includes:
Adrenal gland
Contusion, haematoma, laceration or rupture of other pelvic organ with or without open wound
into abdominal/pelvic cavity
Genitourinary organ NOS
Prostate
Seminal vesicle
Vas deferens
Excludes:
open wound of other and unspecified external genital organs (S31.5-)
S37.8 Injury of other pelvic organs Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S37.80 Haematoma of other pelvic organs S37.800o
S37.801o
S37.81 Laceration of other pelvic organs S37.810o
S37.811o
S37.89 Injury NOS of other pelvic organs S37.890o
S37.891o
S37.9
Injury of unspecified pelvic organ
Includes:
Contusion, haematoma, laceration or rupture of unspecified pelvic organ with or without open
wound into abdominal/pelvic cavity
Excludes:
(retro)peritoneal haematoma (S36.8)
obstetrical haematoma (O71.7)
soft tissue pelvic hematoma (S31.0)
S37.9 Injury of unspecified pelvic organ
Without open wound into cavity With open wound into cavity
S37.90 Haematoma of unspecified pelvic organ S37.900o S37.901o
S37.91 Laceration of unspecified pelvic organ S37.910o S37.911o
S37.99 Injury NOS of unspecified pelvic organ S37.990o S37.991o
798
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S38
Crushing injury and traumatic amputation of part of abdomen, lower back
and pelvis
S38.0 S38.1 Crushing injury of other and unspecified parts of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
S38.2 Traumatic amputation of external genital organs
     Includes:
    Labium (majus)(minus)
   Penis
  Scrotum
 Testis
Vulva
S38.3 
S39.9
Crushing injury of external genital organs
Traumatic amputation of other and unspecified parts of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
Excludes:
transection of abdomen (T05.8)
S39
Other and unspecified injuries of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
S39.0 Injury of muscle and tendon of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
S39.00o Laceration of muscle and tendon of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
S39.08o Other and unspecified injury of muscle and tendon of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
S39.6 Injury of intra-abdominal organ(s) with pelvic organ(s)
S39.7 Other multiple injuries of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
     Includes:
    Injuries classifiable to more than one of the categories (S30)(S39.6)
   Excludes:
  injuries in S36.- with injuries in (S37.-) (S39.6)
S39.8 Other specified injuries of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
S39.9 Unspecified injury of abdomen, lower back and pelvis
799
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S40
Injuries to the shoulder and upper arm
(S40-S49)
Includes:
Excludes:
S40
injuries of:
•
axilla
•
scapular region
bilateral involvement of shoulder and upper arm (T00-T07)
burns and corrosions (T20-T32)
frostbite (T33-T35)
injuries of:
•
arm, level unspecified (T10-T11)
•
elbow (S50-S59)
insect bite or sting, venomous (T63.4)
Superficial injury of shoulder and upper arm
S40.0 Contusion of shoulder and upper arm
S40.7 Multiple superficial injuries of shoulder and upper arm
S40.8 Other superficial injuries of shoulder and upper arm
S40.9 Superficial injury of shoulder and upper arm, unspecified
S41
Open wound of shoulder and upper arm
Excludes:
traumatic amputation of shoulder and upper arm (S48.-)
S41.0 Open wound of shoulder
S41.00o Open wound of shoulder, uncomplicated
S41.01o Open wound of shoulder, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S41.1 Open wound of upper arm
S41.10o Open wound of upper arm, uncomplicated
S41.11o Open wound of upper arm, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S41.7 Multiple open wounds of shoulder and upper arm
S41.70o Multiple open wounds of shoulder and upper arm, uncomplicated
S41.71o Multiple open wounds of shoulder and upper arm, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S41.8 Open wound of other and unspecified parts of shoulder girdle
S41.80o Open wound of other and unspecified parts of shoulder girdle, uncomplicated
S41.81o Open wound of other and unspecified parts of shoulder girdle, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
800
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S42
S42.0
Fracture of shoulder and upper arm
S42.2
Fracture of clavicle
Includes:
Clavicle:
•
acromial end
•
shaft
Collar bone
S42.0 Fracture of clavicle Closed Open
S42.00 Fracture of sternal end of clavicle S42.000o S42.001o
S42.01 Fracture of shaft of clavicle S42.010o S42.011o
S42.02 Fracture of acrominal end of clavicle S42.020o S42.021o
S42.09 Fracture of unspecified part of clavicle S42.090o S42.091o
Includes
• proximal end
Includes
• distal end
S42.1
Fracture of scapula
Includes:
Acromial process
Acromion (process)
Scapula (body) (glenoid cavity)(neck)
Shoulder blade
S42.1 Fracture of scapula
Closed
Open
S42.10 Fracture of acromial process of scapula S42.100o S42.101o
S42.11 Fracture of coracoid process of scapula S42.110o S42.111o
S42.12 Fracture of glenoid cavity and neck of S42.120o S42.121o
scapula 
S42.18 Fracture of other part of scapula S42.180o S42.181o
S42.19 Fracture of unspecified part of scapula S42.190o S42.191o
S42.2
Fracture of upper end of humerus
Includes:
Anatomical neck
Great tuberosity
Proximal end
Surgical neck
Upper epiphysis
S42.2 Fracture of upper end of humerus Closed Open
S42.20 Fracture of surgical neck of humerus S42.200o S42.201o
S42.21 Fracture of anatomical neck of humerus S42.210o S42.211o
S42.22 Fracture of greater tuberosity of S42.220o S42.221o
humerus 
S42.28 Fracture of other part of upper end of S42.280o S42.281o
humerus 
S42.29 Fracture of unspecified part of upper S42.290o S42.291o
end of humerus 
801
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S42.3
S42.3
Fracture of shaft of humerus
Includes:
Humerus NOS
Upper arm NOS
S42.3 Fracture of shaft of humerus Closed Open
S42.30 Fracture of shaft of humerus NOS S42.300o S42.301o
S42.39 Fracture of unspecified part of humerus S42.390o S42.391o
S42.4
Fracture of lower end of humerus
Includes:
Articular process
Distal end
External condyle
Intercondylar
Internal epicondyle
Lower epiphysis
Supracondylar
Excludes:
fracture of elbow NOS (S52.0)
S42.4 Fracture of lower end of humerus Closed Open
S42.40 Supracondylar fracture of humerus S42.400o S42.401o
S42.41 Fracture of lateral condyle of humerus S42.410o S42.411o
S42.42 Fracture of medial condyle of humerus S42.420o S42.421o
S42.43 Fracture of unspecified condyle of S42.430o S42.431o
humerus 
S42.48 Fracture of other part of lower end of S42.480o S42.481o
humerus 
S42.49 Fracture of unspecified part of lower S42.490o S42.491o
end of humerus 
S42.7 Multiple fractures of clavicle, scapula and humerus
S42.700 Multiple fractures of clavicle, scapula and humerus, closed
S42.701 Multiple fractures of clavicle, scapula and humerus, open
S42.8 Fracture of other parts of shoulder and upper arm
S42.800 Fracture of other parts of shoulder and upper arm, closed
S42.801 Fracture of other parts of shoulder and upper arm, open
S42.9 Fracture of shoulder girdle, part unspecified
     Includes:
    Fracture of shoulder NOS
S42.900 Fracture of shoulder girdle, part unspecified, closed
S42.901 Fracture of shoulder girdle, part unspecified, open
S43
S43.0
Dislocation, sprain and strain of joints and ligaments of shoulder girdle
Dislocation of shoulder joint
Includes:
Glenohumeral joint
S43.0 Dislocation of shoulder joint Closed Open
S43.00 Anterior dislocation of shoulder S43.000o S43.001o
S43.01 Posterior dislocation of humerus S43.010o S43.011o
S43.02 Inferior dislocation of humerus S43.020o S43.021o
S43.09 Unspecified dislocation of S43.090o S43.091o
glenohumeral joint 
802
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S43.1 Dislocation of acromioclavicular joint
S43.100o Dislocation of acromioclavicular joint, closed
S43.101o Dislocation of acromioclavicular joint, open
S43.2 Dislocation of sternoclavicular joint
S43.200o Dislocation of sternoclavicular joint, closed
S43.201o Dislocation of sternoclavicular joint, open
S43.3 S43.38 Dislocation of other and unspecified parts of shoulder girdle
            Includes:
           Dislocation of shoulder girdle NOS
          Dislocation of other parts of shoulder girdle
S43.380o Dislocation of other parts of shoulder girdle, closed
S43.381o Dislocation of other parts of shoulder girdle, open
S43.39 Dislocation of unspecified part of shoulder girdle
S43.390o Dislocation of unspecified part of shoulder girdle, closed
S43.391o Dislocation of unspecified part of shoulder girdle, open
S43.4 Sprain and strain of shoulder joint
     Includes:
    coracohumeral (ligament)
   rotator cuff capsule
S43.400o Sprain and strain of shoulder joint, coracohumeral joint
S43.401o Sprain and strain of shoulder joint, rotator cuff capsule
S43.402o Sprain and strain of shoulder joint, NOS
        Includes:
       glenohumeral joint
      shoulder joint NOS
S43.5 Sprain and strain of acromioclavicular joint
     Includes:
    Acromioclavicular ligament
S43.6 Sprain and strain of sternoclavicular joint
S43.7 Sprain and strain of other and unspecified parts of shoulder girdle
     Includes:
    Sprain and strain of shoulder girdle NOS
S43.70o Sprain and strain of other and unspecified parts of shoulder girdle, coracoclavicular joint
       (ligament)
S43.78o Sprain and strain of other parts of shoulder girdle
S43.79o Sprain and strain of unspecified part of shoulder girdle
S44
S44.2
Injury of nerves at shoulder and upper arm level
Excludes:
injury of brachial plexus (S14.3)
S44.0 Injury of ulnar nerve at upper arm level
     Excludes:
    ulnar nerve NOS (S54.0)
S44.00o Laceration of ulnar nerve at upper arm level
       Includes:
      minor, major, moderate lacerations, puncture, traumatic rupture
S44.08o Other and unspecified injury of ulnar nerve at upper arm level
S44.1 Injury of median nerve at upper arm level
     Excludes:
    median nerve NOS (S54.1)
S44.10o Laceration of median nerve at upper arm level
       Includes:
      minor, major, moderate lacerations, puncture, traumatic rupture
S44.18o Other and unspecified injury of median nerve at upper arm level
S44.2 Injury of radial nerve at upper arm level
     Excludes:
    radial nerve NOS (S54.2)
803
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S44.20o 
S44.20o
Laceration of radial nerve at upper arm level
Includes:
minor, major, moderate lacerations, puncture, traumatic rupture
S44.28o Other and unspecified injury of radial nerve at upper arm level
S44.3 Injury of axillary nerve
S44.30o Laceration of axillary nerve
       Includes:
      minor, major, moderate lacerations, puncture, traumatic rupture
S44.38o Other and unspecified injury of axillary nerve
S44.4 Injury of musculocutaneous nerve
S44.40o Laceration of musculocutaneous nerve
       Includes:
      minor, major, moderate lacerations, puncture, traumatic rupture
S44.48o Other and unspecified injury of musculocutaneous nerve
S44.5 Injury of cutaneous sensory nerve at shoulder and upper arm level
S44.50o Laceration of cutaneous sensory nerve at shoulder and upper arm level
       Includes:
      minor, major, moderate lacerations, puncture, traumatic rupture
S44.58o Other specified injury of cutaneous sensory nerve at shoulder and upper arm level
S44.7 Injury of multiple nerves at shoulder and upper arm level
S44.70o Laceration of multiple nerves at shoulder and upper arm level
       Includes:
      minor, major, moderate lacerations, puncture, traumatic rupture
S44.78o Other and unspecified injury of multiple nerves at shoulder and upper arm level
S44.8 Injury of other nerves at shoulder and upper arm level
S44.80o Laceration of other nerves at shoulder and upper arm level
       Includes:
      minor, major, moderate lacerations, puncture, traumatic rupture
S44.88o Other and unspecified injury of other nerves at shoulder and upper arm level
S44.9 Injury of unspecified nerve at shoulder and upper arm level
S44.90o Laceration of unspecified nerve at shoulder and upper arm level
       Includes:
      minor, major, moderation lacerations, puncture, traumatic rupture
S44.98o Other and unspecified injury of unspecified nerve at shoulder and upper arm level
S45
Injury of blood vessels at shoulder and upper arm level
Excludes:
injury of subclavian:
•
artery (S25.1)
•
vein (S25.3)
S45.0 Injury of axillary artery
S45.1 Injury of brachial artery
S45.2 Injury of axillary and brachial vein
S45.3 Injury of superficial vein at shoulder and upper arm level
S45.7 Injury of multiple blood vessels at shoulder and upper arm level
S45.8 Injury of other blood vessels at shoulder and upper arm level
S45.9 Injury of unspecified blood vessel at shoulder and upper arm level
S46
Injury of muscle and tendon at shoulder and upper arm level
Excludes:
injury of muscle and tendon at or below elbow (S56.-)
S46.0 Injury of muscle(s) and tendon(s) of the rotator cuff of shoulder
S46.00o Laceration of muscle(s) and tendon(s) of the rotator cuff of shoulder
S46.08o Other and unspecified injury of muscle(s) and tendon(s) of the rotator cuff of shoulder
804
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S46.1 Injury of muscle and tendon of long head of biceps
S46.10o Laceration of muscle and tendon of long head of bicep
S46.18o Other and unspecified injury of muscle and tendon of long head of bicep
S46.2 Injury of muscle and tendon of other parts of biceps
S46.20o Laceration of muscle and tendon of other parts of bicep
S46.28o Other and unspecified injury of muscle and tendon of other parts of bicep
S46.3 Injury of muscle and tendon of triceps
S46.30o Laceration of muscle and tendon of triceps
S46.38o Other and unspecified injury of muscle and tendon of triceps
S46.7 Injury of multiple muscles and tendons at shoulder and upper arm level
S46.70o Laceration of multiple muscles and tendons at shoulder and upper arm level
S46.78o Other and unspecified injury of multiple muscles and tendons at shoulder and upper arm level
S46.8 Injury of other muscles and tendons at shoulder and upper arm level
S46.80o Laceration of other muscles and tendons at shoulder and upper arm level
S46.88o Other and unspecified injury of other muscles and tendons at shoulder and upper arm level
S46.9 Injury of unspecified muscle and tendon at shoulder and upper arm level
S46.90o Laceration of unspecified muscle and tendon at shoulder and upper arm level
S46.98o Other and unspecified injury of unspecified muscle and tendon at shoulder and upper arm
       level
S47
S49.9
Crushing injury of shoulder and upper arm
Excludes:
crushing injury of elbow (S57.0)
S47.0o Crushing injury of shoulder region
S47.1o Crushing injury of scapular region
S47.2o Crushing injury of axillary region
S47.3o Crushing injury of upper arm
S47.7o Crushing injury of multiple sites of shoulder & upper arm
S47.8o Crushing injury of other specified parts of shoulder & upper arm
S48
Traumatic amputation of shoulder and upper arm
Excludes:
traumatic amputation:
•
at elbow level (S58.0)
•
of arm, level unspecified (T11.6)
S48.0 Traumatic amputation at shoulder joint
S48.1 Traumatic amputation at level between shoulder and elbow
S48.9 Traumatic amputation of shoulder and upper arm, level unspecified
S49
Other and unspecified injuries of shoulder and upper arm
S49.7 Multiple injuries of shoulder and upper arm
     Includes:
    Injuries classifiable to more than one of the categories (S40-S48)
S49.8 Other specified injuries of shoulder and upper arm
S49.9 Unspecified injury of shoulder and upper arm
805
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S50
Injuries to the elbow and forearm
(S50-S59)
Excludes:
S50
bilateral involvement of elbow and forearm (T00-T07)
burns and corrosions (T20-T32)
frostbite (T33-T35)
injuries of:
•
arm, level unspecified (T10-T11)
•
wrist and hand (S60-S69)
insect bite or sting, venomous (T63.4)
Superficial injury of forearm
Excludes:
superficial injury of wrist and hand (S60.-)
S50.0 Contusion of elbow
S50.1 Contusion of other and unspecified parts of forearm
S50.7 Multiple superficial injuries of forearm
S50.8 Other superficial injuries of forearm
S50.9 Superficial injury of forearm, unspecified
     Includes:
    Superficial injury of elbow NOS
S51
Open wound of forearm
Excludes:
open wound of wrist and hand (S61.-)
traumatic amputation of forearm (S58.-)
S51.0 Open wound of elbow
S51.00o Open wound of elbow, uncomplicated
S51.01o Open wound of elbow, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S51.7 Open wound of forearm, multiple
S51.70o Open wound of forearm, multiple, uncomplicated
S51.71o Open wound of forearm, multiple, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S51.8 Open wound of other parts of forearm
S51.80o Open wound of other parts of forearm, uncomplicated
S51.81o Open wound of other parts of forearm, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S51.9 Open wound of forearm, part unspecified
S51.90o Open wound of forearm, part unspecified, uncomplicated
S51.91o Open wound of forearm, part unspecified, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
806
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S52
Fracture of forearm
Excludes:
S52.0
fracture at wrist and hand level (S62.-)
S52.5
Fracture of upper end of ulna
Includes:
Elbow NOS
Fracture of upper end of ulna
Monteggia's fracture-dislocation
Olecranon process
Proximal end
S52.0 Fracture of upper end of ulna Closed Open
S52.00 Fracture of olecranon process of ulna S52.000o S52.001o
S52.01 Fracture of coronoid process of ulna S52.010o S52.011o
S52.02 Monteggia's fracture S52.020o S52.021o
S52.08 Other/multiple fractures of upper end of S52.080o S52.081o
ulna 
S52.09 Unspecified fracture of upper end of S52.091o
ulna 
S52.1
S52.090o
Fracture of upper end of radius
Includes:
Head
Neck
Proximal end
S52.1 Fracture of upper end of radius Closed Open
S52.10 Fracture of head of radius S52.100o S52.101o
S52.11 Fracture of neck of radius S52.110o S52.111o
S52.12 Fracture of radius with ulna, upper end S52.120o S52.121o
S52.18 Other/multiple fracture of upper end of S52.180o S52.181o
radius 
S52.19 Unspecified fracture of upper end of S52.191o
radius 
S52.190o
S52.2 Fracture of shaft of ulna
S52.200 Fracture of shaft of ulna, closed
S52.201 Fracture of shaft of ulna, open
S52.3 Fracture of shaft of radius
S52.300 Fracture of shaft of radius, closed
S52.301 Fracture of shaft of radius, open
S52.4 Fracture of shafts of both ulna and radius
S52.400 Fracture of shafts of both ulna and radius, closed
S52.401 Fracture of shafts of both ulna and radius, open
S52.5 Fracture of lower end of radius
     Includes:
    Colles' fracture
   Smith's fracture
S52.5 Fracture of lower end of radius Closed Open
S52.50 Colles' fracture S52.500o S52.501o
S52.58 Other fracture of lower end of radius S52.580o S52.581o
S52.59 Unspecified fracture of lower end of S52.590o S52.591o
radius 
807
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S52.6 
S52.6
Fracture of lower end of both ulna and radius
S52.600 Fracture of lower end of both ulna and radius, closed
S52.601 Fracture of lower end of both ulna and radius, open
S52.7 Multiple fractures of forearm
     Excludes:
    fractures of both ulna and radius:
   •
    lower end (S52.6)
   •
    shafts (S52.4)
S52.700 Multiple fractures of forearm, closed
S52.701 Multiple fractures of forearm, open
S52.8 Fracture of other parts of forearm
     Includes:
    Head
   of ulna
  Lower end
S52.800 Fracture of other parts of forearm, closed
S52.801 Fracture of other parts of forearm, open
S52.9 Fracture of forearm, part unspecified
S52.900 Fracture of forearm, part unspecified, closed
S52.901 Fracture of forearm, part unspecified, open
S53
Dislocation, sprain and strain of joints and ligaments of elbow
S53.0 Dislocation of radial head
     Includes:
    Radiohumeral joint
   Excludes:
  Monteggia's fracture-dislocation (S52.0)
S53.1 Dislocation of elbow
     Includes:
    Ulnohumeral joint
   Excludes:
  dislocation of radial head alone (S53.0)
S53.1 Dislocation of elbow Closed open
S53.10 Anterior dislocation of elbow S53.100o S53.101o
S53.11 Posterior dislocation of elbow S53.110o S53.111o
S53.12 Medial dislocation of elbow S53.120o S53.121o
S53.13 Lateral dislocation of elbow S53.130o S53.131o
S53.18 Other dislocation of elbow S53.180o S53.181o
S53.19 Unspecified dislocation of elbow S53.190o S53.191o
S53.2 Traumatic rupture of radial collateral ligament
S53.3 Traumatic rupture of ulnar collateral ligament
S53.4 Sprain and strain of elbow
S53.40o Sprain and strain of radial collateral ligament
S53.41o Sprain and strain of ulnar collateral ligament
S53.42o Sprain and strain of radiohumeral (joint)
S53.43o Sprain and strain of ulnohumeral (joint)
S53.48o Other sprain and strain of elbow
S53.49o Unspecified sprain and strain of elbow
808
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S54
Injury of nerves at forearm level
Excludes:
injury of nerves at wrist and hand level (S64.-)
S54.0 S54.00o Laceration of ulnar nerve at forearm level
S54.08o Other and unspecified ulnar nerve injury at forearm level
S54.1 Injury of median nerve at forearm level
     Includes:
    Median nerve NOS
S54.10o Laceration of median nerve at forearm level
S54.18o Other and unspecified median nerve injury at forearm level
S54.2 Injury of radial nerve at forearm level
     Includes:
    Radial nerve NOS
S54.20o Laceration of radial nerve at forearm level
S54.28o Other and unspecified radial nerve injury at forearm level
S54.3 Injury of cutaneous sensory nerve at forearm level
S54.30o Laceration of cutaneous sensory nerve at forearm level
S54.38o Other and unspecified cutaneous sensory nerve injury at forearm level
S54.7 Injury of multiple nerves at forearm level
S54.70o Laceration of multiple nerves at forearm level
S54.78o Other and unspecified injury of multiple nerves at forearm level
S54.8 Injury of other nerves at forearm level
S54.80o Laceration of other nerves at forearm level
S54.88o Other and unspecified nerve injury of other nerves at forearm level
S54.9 Injury of unspecified nerve at forearm level
S54.90o Laceration of unspecified nerve at forearm level
S54.98o 
S56.10o
Injury of ulnar nerve at forearm level
Includes:
Ulnar nerve NOS
Other and unspecified nerve injury of unspecified nerves at forearm level
S55
Injury of blood vessels at forearm level
Excludes:
injury of:
•
blood vessels at wrist and hand level (S65.-)
•
brachial vessels (S45.1-S45.2)
S55.0 Injury of ulnar artery at forearm level
S55.1 Injury of radial artery at forearm level
S55.2 Injury of vein at forearm level
S55.7 Injury of multiple blood vessels at forearm level
S55.8 Injury of other blood vessels at forearm level
S55.9 Injury of unspecified blood vessel at forearm level
S56
Injury of muscle and tendon at forearm level
Excludes:
injury of muscle and tendon at or below wrist (S66.-)
S56.0 Injury of flexor muscle and tendon on thumb at forearm level
S56.00o Laceration of flexor muscle and tendon of thumb at forearm level
S56.08o Other and unspecified injury of flexor muscle and tendon of thumb at forearm level
S56.1 Injury of long flexor muscle and tendon of other finger(s) at forearm level
S56.10o Laceration of long flexor muscle and tendon of other finger(s) at forearm level
809
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S56.18o 
S56.18o
Other and unspecified injury of long flexor muscle and tendon of other finger(s) at forearm
level
S56.2 Injury of other flexor muscle and tendon at forearm level
S56.20o Laceration of other flexor muscle and tendon at forearm level
S56.28o Other and unspecified injury of other flexor muscle and tendon at forearm level
S56.3 Injury of extensor or abductor muscles and tendons of thumb at forearm level
S56.30o Laceration of extensor or abductor muscles and tendons of thumb at forearm level
S56.38o Other and unspecified injury of extensor or abductor muscles and tendons of thumb at
       forearm level
S56.4 Injury of extensor muscle and tendon of other finger(s) at forearm level
S56.40o Laceration of extensor muscle and tendon of other finger(s) at forearm level
S56.48o Other and unspecified injury of extensor muscle and tendon of other finger(s) at forearm level
S56.5 Injury of other extensor muscle and tendon at forearm level
S56.50o Laceration of other extensor muscle and tendon at forearm level
S56.58o Other and unspecified injury of other extensor muscle and tendon at forearm level
S56.7 Injury of multiple muscles and tendons at forearm level
S56.70o Laceration of multiple muscles and tendons at forearm level
S56.78o Other and unspecified injury of multiple muscles and tendons at forearm level
S56.8 Injury of other and unspecified muscles and tendons at forearm level
S56.80o Laceration of other and unspecified muscles and tendons at forearm level
S56.88o Other and unspecified injury of other and unspecified muscles and tendons at forearm level
S57
Crushing injury of forearm
Excludes:
crushing injury of wrist and hand (S67.-)
S57.0 Crushing injury of elbow
S57.8 Crushing injury of other parts of forearm
S57.9 Crushing injury of forearm, part unspecified
S58
Traumatic amputation of forearm
Excludes:
traumatic amputation of wrist and hand (S68.-)
S58.0 Traumatic amputation at elbow level
S58.1 Traumatic amputation at level between elbow and wrist
S58.9 Traumatic amputation of forearm, level unspecified
S59
Other and unspecified injuries of forearm
Excludes:
other and unspecified injuries of wrist and hand (S69.-)
S59.7 Multiple injuries of forearm
     Includes:
    Injuries classifiable to more than one of the categories (S50-S58)
S59.8 Other specified injuries of forearm
S59.9 Unspecified injury of forearm
810
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
Injuries to the wrist and hand
(S60-S69)
Excludes:
S60
S61.91o
bilateral involvement of wrist and hand (T00-T07)
burns and corrosions (T20-T32)
frostbite (T33-T35)
injuries of arm, level unspecified (T10-T11)
insect bite or sting, venomous (T63.4)
Superficial injury of wrist and hand
S60.0 Contusion of finger(s) without damage to nail
     Includes:
    Contusion of finger(s) NOS
   Excludes:
  contusion involving nail (matrix) (S60.1)
S60.1 Contusion of finger(s) with damage to nail
S60.2 Contusion of other parts of wrist and hand
S60.7 Multiple superficial injuries of wrist and hand
S60.8 Other superficial injuries of wrist and hand
S60.9 Unspecified superficial injury of wrist and hand
S61
Open wound of wrist and hand
Excludes:
traumatic amputation of wrist and hand (S68.-)
S61.0 Open wound of finger(s) without damage to nail
     Includes:
    Open wound of finger(s) NOS
   Excludes:
  open wound involving nail (matrix) (S61.1)
S61.00o Open wound of finger(s) without damage to nail, uncomplicated
S61.01o Open wound of finger(s) without damage to nail, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S61.1 Open wound of finger(s) with damage to nail
S61.10o Open wound of finger(s) with damage to nail, uncomplicated
S61.11o Open wound of finger(s) with damage to nail, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S61.2o Avulsion, finger, hand, wrist
S61.7 Multiple open wounds of wrist and hand
S61.70o Multiple open wounds of wrist and hand, uncomplicated
S61.71o Multiple open wounds of wrist and hand, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S61.8 Open wound of other parts of wrist and hand
S61.80o Open wound of other parts of wrist and hand, uncomplicated
S61.81o Open wound of other parts of wrist and hand, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S61.9 Open wound of wrist and hand part, part unspecified
S61.90o Open wound of wrist and hand part, part unspecified, uncomplicated
S61.91o Open wound of wrist and hand part, part unspecified, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
811
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S62
Fracture at wrist and hand level
Excludes:
S62
fracture of distal parts of ulna and radius (S52.-)
S62.0 Fracture of navicular [scaphoid] bone of hand
S62.000 Fracture of navicular [scaphoid] bone of hand, closed
S62.001 Fracture of navicular [scaphoid] bone of hand, open
S62.1 Fracture of other carpal bone(s)
     Includes:
    Capitate [os magnum]
   Hamate [unciform]
  Lunate [semilunar]
 Pisiform
Trapezium [greater multangular]
Trapezoid [lesser multangular]
Triquetrum [cuneiform of carpus]
S62.1 Fracture of other carpal bone(s) Closed Open
S62.10 Fracture of lunate bone S62.100o S62.101o
S62.11 Fracture of triquetral bone S62.110o S62.111o
S62.12 Fracture of pisiform bone S62.120o S62.121o
S62.13 Fracture of trapezium bone S62.130o S62.131o
S62.14 Fracture of trapezoid bone S62.140o S62.141o
S62.15 Fracture of capitate bone S62.150o S62.151o
S62.16 Fracture of hamate bone S62.160o S62.161o
S62.18 Fracture of other carpal bones S62.180o S62.181o
S62.19 Fracture of unspecified carpal bones S62.190o S62.191o
S62.2
Fracture of first metacarpal bone
Includes:
Bennett's fracture
S62.2 Fracture of first metacarpal bone
Closed
Open
S62.20 Fracture of base of first metacarpal bone S62.200o S62.201o
S62.21 Fracture of shaft of first metacarpal S62.210o S62.211o
bone 
S62.22 Fracture of neck of first metacarpal bone S62.220o S62.221o
S62.27 Fracture of multiple sites of first S62.270o S62.271o
metacarpal bones 
S62.29 Fracture of unspecified site of first S62.290o S62.291o
metacarpal bone 
812
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S62.3
Fracture of other metacarpal bone
Use additional code (S62.2-) to identify any fracture of the first metacarpal bone.
Excludes:
Fractures of multiple metacarpal bones (2 to 5) (S62.4-)
S62.3 Fracture of other metacarpal bone Closed Open
S62.30 Fracture of base of other metacarpal S62.300o S62.301o
bone 
S62.31 Fracture of shaft of other metacarpal S62.310o S62.311o
bone 
S62.32 Fracture of head of other metacarpal S62.320o S62.321o
bone 
S62.37 Fracture of multiple sites of other S62.370o S62.371o
metacarpal bone 
S62.39 Fracture of unspecified site of other S62.390o 
metacarpal bone 
S62.6
S62.391o
Includes
• Fracture of metacarpal neck
S62.4
Multiple fractures of other metacarpal bones
Includes:
More than one fracture of metacarpal bones 2 to 5 of either hand
Excludes:
fracture of first metacarpal bone(s) (S62.2-) with fracture of one other metacarpal bone (S62.3-)
S62.4 Multiple fractures of other Closed Open
metacarpal bones 
S62.40 Multiple fractures of base of other S62.400o S62.401o
metacarpal bones 
S62.41 Multiple fractures of shaft of other S62.410o S62.411o
metacarpal bones 
S62.42 Multiple fractures of head of other S62.420o S62.421o
metacarpal bones 
S62.47 Multiple fractures of multiple sites of S62.470o S62.471o
other metacarpal bones 
S62.49 Multiple fractures unspecified site of S62.490o S62.491o
other metacarpal bones 
S62.5 Fracture of thumb Closed Open
S62.50 Fracture of proximal phalanx S62.500o S62.501o
S62.51 Fracture of distal phalanx S62.510o S62.511o
S62.57 Fracture of multiple sites of thumb S62.570o S62.571o
S62.59 Fracture of unspecified part of phalanx S62.590o S62.591o
S62.5
S62.6
Fracture of thumb
Fracture of other finger
S62.6 Fracture of other finger
Closed
Open
S62.60 Fracture of middle or proximal phalanx S62.600o S62.601o
of finger 
S62.61 Fracture of distal phalanx of finger S62.610o S62.611o
S62.67 Fracture of multiple sites of finger S62.670o S62.671o
S62.69 Fracture of unspecified part of phalanx S62.690o S62.691o
of finger 
813
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S62.7 
S62.7
Multiple fractures of fingers
S62.700 Multiple fractures of fingers, closed
S62.701 Multiple fractures of fingers, open
S62.8 Fracture of other and unspecified parts of wrist and hand
S62.800 Fracture of other and unspecified parts of wrist and hand, closed
S62.801 Fracture of other and unspecified parts of wrist and hand, open
S63
S63.0
Dislocation, sprain and strain of joints and ligaments at wrist and hand level
Dislocation of wrist
Includes:
Carpal (bone)
Carpometacarpal (joint)
Metacarpal (bone), proximal end
Midcarpal (joint)
Radiocarpal (joint)
Radioulnar (joint), distal
Radius,
distal end
Ulna,
S63.0 Dislocation of wrist Closed Open
S63.00 Dislocation of radioulnar (joint) distal S63.000o S63.001o
S63.01 Dislocation of radiocarpal (joint) S63.010o S63.011o
S63.02 Dislocation of midcarpal (joint) S63.020o S63.021o
S63.03 Dislocation of carpometacarpal (joint) S63.030o S63.031o
S63.04 Dislocation of metacarpal (bone) S63.040o S63.041o
proximal end 
S63.08 Other dislocation of wrist S63.080o S63.081o
S63.09 Unspecified dislocation of wrist S63.090o S63.091o
S63.1
Dislocation of finger
Includes:
Interphalangeal (joint), hand
Metacarpal (bone), distal end
Metacarpophalangeal (joint)
Phalanx, hand
Thumb
S63.1 Dislocation of finger Closed Open
S63.10 Dislocation of metacarpophalangeal S63.100o S63.101o
(joint) of finger 
S63.11 Dislocation of interphalangeal (joint) of S63.110o S63.111o
finger 
S63.18 Other dislocation of finger S63.180o S63.181o
S63.19 Unspecified dislocation of finger S63.190o S63.191o
S63.2 Multiple dislocations of fingers
S63.200o Multiple dislocations of fingers, closed
S63.201o Multiple dislocations of fingers, open
S63.3 Traumatic rupture of ligament of wrist and carpus
     Includes:
    Collateral, wrist
   Radiocarpal (ligament)
  Ulnocarpal (palmar)
814
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S63.4
Traumatic rupture of ligament of finger at metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joint(s)
Includes:
Collateral
Palmar
Volar plate
S63.5 Sprain and strain of wrist
     Includes:
    Carpal (joint)
   Radiocarpal (joint) (ligament)
S63.50o Sprain and strain of carpal (joint) of wrist
S63.51o Sprain and strain of radiocarpal (joint)(ligament) of wrist
S63.58o Other sprain and strain of wrist
S63.59o Unspecified sprain and strain of wrist
S63.6 Sprain and strain of finger(s)
     Includes:
    Interphalangeal (joint), hand
   Metacarpophalangeal (joint)
  Phalanx, hand
 Thumb
S63.60o Sprain and strain of interphalangeal (joint) of finger(s)
S63.61o Sprain and strain of metacarpophalangeal (joint) of finger(s)
S63.68o Other sprain and strain of finger(s)
S63.69o Unspecified sprain and strain of finger(s)
S63.7 Sprain and strain of other and unspecified parts of hand
S63.70o Sprain and strain of carpometacarpal (joint) of hand
S63.71o Sprain and strain of metacarpal (distal) (proximal)
S63.72o Midcarpal sprain and strain of hand
S63.78o Sprain and strain of other parts of hand
S63.79o 
S64.70o
Sprain and strain of unspecified parts of hand
S64
Injury of nerves at wrist and hand level
S64.0 Injury of ulnar nerve at wrist and hand level
S64.00o Laceration of ulnar nerve at wrist and hand level
S64.08o Other and unspecified injury of ulnar nerve at wrist and hand level
S64.1 Injury of median nerve at wrist and hand level
S64.10o Laceration of median nerve at wrist and hand level
S64.18o Other and unspecified injury of median nerve at wrist and hand level
S64.2 Injury of radial nerve at wrist and hand level
S64.20o Laceration of radial nerve at wrist and hand level
S64.28o Other and unspecified injury of radial nerve at wrist and hand level
S64.3 Injury of digital nerve of thumb
S64.30o Laceration of digital nerve of thumb
S64.38o Other and unspecified injury of digital nerve of thumb
S64.4 Injury of digital nerve of other finger
S64.40o Laceration of digital nerve of other finger
S64.48o Other and unspecified injury of digital nerve of other finger
S64.7 Injury of multiple nerves at wrist and hand level
S64.70o Laceration of multiple nerves at wrist and hand level
815
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S64.78o 
S64.78o
Other specified injury of multiple nerves at wrist and hand level
S64.8 Injury of other nerves at wrist and hand level
S64.80o Laceration of other nerves at wrist and hand level
S64.88o Other and unspecified injury of other nerves at wrist and hand
S64.9 Injury of unspecified nerve at wrist and hand level
S64.90o Laceration of unspecified nerve at wrist and hand level
S64.98o Other and unspecified injury of unspecified nerves at wrist and hand level
S65
Injury of blood vessels at wrist and hand level
S65.0 Injury of ulnar artery at wrist and hand level
S65.1 Injury of radial artery at wrist and hand level
S65.2 Injury of superficial palmar arch
S65.3 Injury of deep palmar arch
S65.4 Injury of blood vessel(s) of thumb
S65.5 Injury of blood vessel(s) of other finger
S65.7 Injury of multiple blood vessels at wrist and hand level
S65.8 Injury of other blood vessels at wrist and hand level
S65.9 Injury of unspecified blood vessel at wrist and hand level
S66
Injury of muscle and tendon at wrist and hand level
Includes:
Injury of digital muscle and tendon of hand
S66 Injury of muscle and tendon at wrist Laceration Other and unspecified injury
and hand level 
S66.0 S66.00o S66.08o
Injury of long flexor muscle and 
tendon of thumb at wrist and hand level 
S66.1 S66.18o
Injury of flexor muscle and tendon of S66.10o 
other finger at wrist and hand level 
S66.2 S66.28o
Injury of extensor muscle and tendon S66.20o 
of thumb at wrist and hand level 
S66.3 S66.38o
Injury of extensor muscle and tendon S66.30o 
of other finger at wrist and hand level 
S66.4 S66.48o
Injury of intrinsic muscle and tendon S66.40o 
of thumb at wrist and hand level 
S66.5 S66.58o
Injury of intrinsic muscle and tendon S66.50o 
of other finger at wrist and hand level 
S66.6 S66.68o
Injury of multiple flexor muscles and S66.60o 
tendons at wrist and hand level 
S66.7 S66.70o S66.78o
Injury of multiple extensor muscles 
and tendons at wrist and hand level 
S66.8 S66.88o
Injury of other muscles and tendons at S66.80o 
wrist and hand level 
S66.9 S66.98o
Injury of unspecified muscle and 
tendon at wrist and hand level 
S67
S66.90o
Crushing injury of wrist and hand
S67.0 Crushing injury of thumb and other finger(s)
S67.8 Crushing injury of other and unspecified parts of wrist and hand
816
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S68
Traumatic amputation of wrist and hand
S68.0 S68.1 Traumatic amputation of other single finger (complete)(partial)
S68.2 Traumatic amputation of two or more fingers alone (complete)(partial)
S68.3 Combined traumatic amputation of (part of) finger(s) with other parts of wrist and hand
S68.4 Traumatic amputation of hand at wrist level
S68.8 Traumatic amputation of other parts of wrist and hand
S68.9 
S69.9
Traumatic amputation of thumb (complete)(partial)
Traumatic amputation of wrist and hand, level unspecified
S69
Other and unspecified injuries of wrist and hand
S69.7 Multiple injuries of wrist and hand
     Includes:
    Injuries classifiable to more than one of the categories (S60-S68)
S69.8 Other specified injuries of wrist and hand
S69.9 Unspecified injury of wrist and hand
817
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S70
Injuries to the hip and thigh
(S70-S79)
Excludes:
S70
bilateral involvement of hip and thigh (T00-T07)
burns and corrosions (T20-T32)
frostbite (T33-T35)
injuries of leg, level unspecified (T12-T13)
insect bite or sting, venomous (T63.4)
Superficial injury of hip and thigh
S70.0 Contusion of hip
S70.1 Contusion of thigh
S70.7 Multiple superficial injuries of hip and thigh
S70.8 Other superficial injuries of hip and thigh
S70.9 Superficial injury of hip and thigh, unspecified
S71
Open wound of hip and thigh
Excludes:
traumatic amputation of hip and thigh (S78.-)
S71.0 Open wound of hip
S71.00o Open wound of hip, uncomplicated
S71.01o Open wound of hip, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S71.1 Open wound of thigh
S71.10o Open wound of thigh, uncomplicated
S71.11o Open wound of thigh, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S71.7 Multiple open wounds of hip and thigh
S71.70o Multiple open wounds of hip and thigh, uncomplicated
S71.71o Multiple open wounds of hip and thigh, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S71.8 Open wound of other and unspecified parts of pelvic girdle
S71.80o Open wound of other and unspecified parts of pelvic girdle, uncomplicated
S71.81o Open wound of other and unspecified parts of pelvic girdle, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
818
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S72
S72.0
Fracture of femur
S72.801
Fracture of neck of femur
Includes:
Fracture of hip NOS
S72.0 Fracture of neck of femur Closed Open
S72.00 Fracture of upper femoral epiphysis S72.000o S72.001o
(separation) 
S72.01 Fracture of base of femoral neck S72.010o S72.011o
(cervicotrochanteric) 
S72.08 Other fracture of femoral neck S72.080o S72.081o
S72.090o S72.091o
Includes
• Intracapsular fracture of femur
• Subcapital fracture of femur
S72.09 Unspecified fracture of neck of femur
Includes
• Transcervical fracture of femur NOS
S72.1
S72.10 Pertrochanteric fracture
      Includes:
     Intertrochanteric fracture
    Multiple pertrochanteric fractures
   Trochanteric fracture
  Intertrochanteric fracture
S72.100o Intertrochanteric fracture, closed
S72.101o Intertrochanteric fracture, open
S72.19 Unspecified trochanteric fracture
S72.190o Unspecified trochanteric fracture, closed
S72.191o Unspecified trochanteric fracture, open
S72.2 Subtrochanteric fracture
S72.200 Subtrochanteric fracture, closed
S72.201 Subtrochanteric fracture, open
S72.3 Fracture of shaft of femur
S72.300 Fracture of shaft of femur, closed
S72.301 Fracture of shaft of femur, open
S72.4 Fracture of lower end of femur
S72.4 Fracture of lower end of femur Closed Open
S72.40 Fracture of lower femoral epiphysis S72.400o S72.401o
(separation) 
S72.41 Condylar fracture of femur S72.410o S72.411o
S72.42 Supracondylar fracture of femur S72.420o S72.421o
S72.49 Unspecified fracture of lower (distal) S72.490o S72.491o
end of femur 
S72.7 Multiple fractures of femur
S72.700 Multiple fractures of femur, closed
S72.701 Multiple fractures of femur, open
S72.8 Fractures of other parts of femur
S72.800 Fractures of other parts of femur, closed
S72.801 Fractures of other parts of femur, open
819
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S72.9 
S72.9
Fracture of femur, part unspecified
S72.900 Fracture of femur, part unspecified, closed
S72.901o Fracture of femur, part unspecified, open
S73
S73.0
Dislocation, sprain and strain of joint and ligaments of hip
Dislocation of hip
S73.0 Dislocation of hip Closed Open
S73.00 Posterior dislocation of hip S73.000o S73.001o
S73.01 Obturator dislocation of hip S73.010o S73.011o
S73.08 Other anterior dislocation of hip S73.080o S73.081o
S73.09 Unspecified dislocation of hip S73.090o S73.091o
S73.1 Sprain and strain of hip
S73.10o Sprain and strain of iliofemoral ligament
S73.11o Sprain and strain of ischiocapsular ligament
S73.18o Sprain and strain of other specified sites of hip
       Includes:
      Ligamentum teres
S73.19o Sprain and strain of unspecified site of hip
S74
Injury of nerves at hip and thigh level
S74.0 Injury of sciatic nerve at hip and thigh level
S74.00o Laceration of sciatic nerve at hip and thigh level
S74.08o Other and unspecified injury of sciatic nerve at hip and thigh level
S74.1 Injury of femoral nerve at hip and thigh level
S74.10o Laceration of femoral nerve at hip and thigh level
S74.18o Other and unspecified injury of femoral nerve at hip and thigh level
S74.2 Injury of cutaneous sensory nerve at hip and thigh level
     Excludes:
    Injury of cutaneous sensory nerve at lower leg level (S84.2)
S74.20o Laceration of cutaneous sensory nerve at hip and thigh level
S74.28o Other and unspecified injury of cutaneous sensory nerve at hip and thigh level
S74.7 Injury of multiple nerves at hip and thigh level
S74.70o Laceration of multiple nerves at hip and thigh level
S74.78o Other and unspecified injury of multiple nerves at hip and thigh level
S74.8 Injury of other nerves at hip and thigh level
     Excludes:
    injury of other nerves around knee (S84.8)
S74.80o Laceration of other nerves at hip and thigh level
S74.88o Other and unspecified injury of other nerves at hip and thigh level
S74.9 Injury of unspecified nerve at hip and thigh level
S74.90o Laceration of unspecified nerve at hip and thigh level
S74.98o Other and unspecified injury of unspecified nerve at hip and thigh level
S75
Injury of blood vessels at hip and thigh level
Excludes:
popliteal artery (S85.0)
S75.0 Injury of femoral artery
S75.1 Injury of femoral vein at hip and thigh level
820
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S75.2 Injury of greater saphenous vein at hip and thigh level
     Excludes:
    greater saphenous vein NOS (S85.3)
S75.7 Injury of multiple blood vessels at hip and thigh level
S75.8 Injury of other blood vessels at hip and thigh level
S75.9 Injury of unspecified blood vessel at hip and thigh level
S76
S78.9
Injury of muscle and tendon at hip and thigh level
S76.0 Injury of muscle and tendon of hip
S76.00o Laceration of muscle and tendon of hip
S76.08o Other and unspecified injury of muscle and tendon of hip
S76.1 Injury of quadriceps muscle and tendon
     Includes:
    Patellar ligament (tendon)
S76.10o Laceration of quadriceps muscle and tendon
S76.18o Other and unspecified injury of quadriceps muscle and tendon
S76.2 Injury of adductor muscle and tendon of thigh
S76.20o Laceration of adductor muscle and tendon of thigh
S76.28o Other and unspecified injury of adductor muscle and tendon of thigh
S76.3 Injury of muscle and tendon of the posterior muscle group at thigh level
S76.30o Laceration of muscle and tendon of the posterior muscle and tendon (group) at thigh level
S76.38o Other and unspecified injury of muscle and tendon of the posterior muscle and tendon (group)
       at thigh level
S76.4 Injury of other and unspecified muscles and tendons at thigh level
S76.40o Laceration of other and unspecified muscles and tendons at thigh level
S76.48o Other and unspecified injury of other and unspecified muscles and tendons at thigh level
S76.7 Injury of mutliple muscles and tendons at hip and thigh level
S76.70o Laceration of multiple muscles and tendons at hip and thigh level
S76.78o Other and unspecified injury of multiple muscles and tendons at hip and thigh level
S77
Crushing injury of hip and thigh
S77.0 Crushing injury of hip
S77.1 Crushing injury of thigh
S77.2 Crushing injury of hip with thigh
S78
Traumatic amputation of hip and thigh
Excludes:
traumatic amputation of lower limb, level unspecified (T13.6)
traumatic amputation through pelvis (S38.3)
S78.0 Traumatic amputation at hip joint
     Includes:
    Traumatic disarticulation of hip
S78.1 Traumatic amputation at level between hip and knee
     Includes:
    Traumatic above knee amputation
S78.9 Traumatic amputation of hip and thigh, level unspecified
821
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S79
S79
Other and specified injuries of hip and thigh
S79.7 Multiple injuries of hip and thigh
     Includes:
    Injuries classifiable to more than one of the categories (S70-S78)
S79.8 Other specified injuries of hip and thigh
S79.9 Unspecified injury of hip and thigh
Injuries to the knee and lower leg
(S80-S89)
Includes:
Excludes:
S80
fracture of ankle and malleolus
bilateral involvement of knee and lower leg (T00-T07)
burns and corrosions (T20-T32)
frostbite (T33-T35)
injuries of:
•
ankle and foot, except fracture of ankle and malleolus (S90-S99)
•
leg, level unspecified (T12-T13)
insect bite or sting, venomous (T63.4)
Superficial injury of lower leg
Excludes:
superficial injury of ankle and foot (S90.-)
S80.0 Contusion of knee
S80.1 Contusion of other and unspecified parts of lower leg
     Excludes:
    Contusion of:
   •
    hip (S70.0)
   •
    thigh (S70.1)
S80.7 Multiple superficial injuries of lower leg
S80.8 Other superficial injuries of lower leg
     Excludes:
    Other superficial injuries of hip and thigh (S70.8)
S80.9 Superficial injury of lower leg, unspecified
S81
Open wound of lower leg
Excludes:
open wound of ankle and foot (S91.-)
traumatic amputation of lower leg (S88.-)
S81.0 Open wound of knee
S81.00o Open wound of knee, uncomplicated
S81.01o Open wound of knee, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S81.7 Multiple open wounds of lower leg
S81.70o Multiple open wounds of lower leg, uncomplicated
S81.71o Multiple open wounds of lower leg, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S81.8 Open wounds of other parts of lower leg
S81.80o Open wounds of other parts of lower leg, uncomplicated
S81.81o Open wounds of other parts of lower leg, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S81.9 Open wound of lower leg, part unspecified
S81.90o Open wound of lower leg, part unspecified, uncomplicated
822
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S81.91o
S82
Open wound of lower leg, part unspecified, complicated
Includes:
Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S82.7
Fracture of lower leg, including ankle
Includes:
Excludes:
malleolus
fracture of foot, except ankle (S92.-)
S82.0 Fracture of patella
     Includes:
    Knee cap
S82.000 Fracture of patella, closed
S82.001 Fracture of patella, open
S82.1 Fracture of upper end of tibia
     Includes:
    Tibial:
   •
    condyles
   •
    head
   •
    proximal end
   •
    tuberosity
with or without mention of fracture of fibula
S82.100 Fracture of upper (proximal) end of tibia with or without fibula, closed
S82.101 Fracture of upper (proximal) end of tibia with or without fibula, open
S82.2 Fracture of shaft of tibia
     Includes:
    With or without mention of fracture of fibula
S82.200 Fracture of shaft of tibia with or without fibula, closed
S82.201 Fracture of shaft of tibia with or without fibula, open
S82.3 Fracture of lower end of tibia
     Includes:
    With or without mention of fracture of fibula
   Excludes:
  Medial malleolus (S82.5)
S82.300 Fracture of lower (distal) end of tibia with or without fibula, closed
S82.301 Fracture of lower (distal) end of tibia with or without fibula, open
S82.4 Fracture of fibula alone
     Excludes:
    Lateral malleolus (S82.6)
S82.400 Fracture of fibula alone, closed
S82.401 Fracture of fibula alone, open
S82.5 Fracture of medial malleolus
     Includes:
    Tibia involving:
   •
    ankle
   •
    malleolus
S82.500 Fracture of medial malleolus, closed
S82.501 Fracture of medial malleolus, open
S82.6 Fracture of lateral malleolus
     Includes:
    Fibula involving:
   •
    ankle
   •
    malleolus
S82.600 Fracture of lateral malleolus, closed
S82.601 Fracture of lateral malleolus, open
S82.7 Multiple fractures of lower leg
     Excludes:
    Fractures of both tibia and fibula:
   •
    lower end (S82.3)
   •
    shafts (S82.2)
   •
    upper end (S82.1)
823
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S82.700 
S82.700
Multiple fractures of lower leg, closed
S82.701 Multiple fractures of lower leg, open
S82.8 Fractures of other parts of lower leg
     Includes:
    Fracture (of):
   •
    ankle NOS
   •
    bimalleolar
   •
    trimalleolar
S82.8 Fractures of other parts of lower
leg
Closed Open
S82.80 Bimalleolar fracture of ankle S82.800o S82.801o
S82.81 Trimalleolar fracture of ankle S82.810o S82.811o
S82.82 Tibial plafond fracture of ankle with or S82.820o S82.821o
without fibular/talar involvement 
S82.890o S82.891o
Includes
• Pilon fracture
S82.89 Fracture of ankle NOS
S82.9 Fracture of lower leg, part unspecified
S82.900 Fracture of lower leg, part unspecified, closed
S82.901 Fracture of lower leg, part unspecified, open
S83
Dislocation, sprain and strain of joints and ligaments of knee
Excludes:
derangement of:
•
knee, internal (M23.-)
•
patella (M22.0-M22.3)
dislocation of knee:
•
old (M24.3)
•
pathological (M24.3)
•
recurrent (M24.4)
S83.0 Dislocation of patella
S83.000o Dislocation of patella, closed
S83.001o Dislocation of patella, open
S83.1 Dislocation of knee
     Includes:
    Tibiofibular (joint)
S83.1 Dislocation of knee
Closed Open
S83.10 Anterior dislocation of knee S83.100o S83.101o
S83.11 Posterior dislocation of knee S83.110o S83.111o
S83.12 Medial dislocation of knee S83.120o S83.121o
S83.13 Lateral dislocation of knee S83.130o S83.131o
S83.18 Other dislocation of knee S83.180o S83.181o
S83.19 Unspecified dislocation of knee S83.190o S83.191o
S83.2 Tear of meniscus, current
     Includes:
    Bucket-handle tear of meniscus
   Excludes:
  old bucket-handle tear (M23.2)
S83.20 Tear of medial meniscus of knee, current
S83.21 Tear of lateral meniscus of knee, current
S83.29 Tear of meniscus of knee, unspecified
S83.3 Tear of articular cartilage(s) of knee, current
824
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S83.4
Sprain and strain involving (fibular)(tibial) collateral ligament of knee
S83.4 Sprain and strain involving S83.40 Sprain and strain of lateral collateral S83.400o S83.401o
Rupture ligament of knee 
(fibular)(tibial) collateral ligament of knee 
S83.41 Sprain and strain of medial collateral S83.410o S83.411o
ligament of knee 
S83.48 Sprain and strain of other collateral S83.480o S83.481o
ligament of knee 
S83.490o 
S84.70o
Other sprain and strain
S83.491o
Includes
• Multiple collateral ligaments of knee
S83.49 Sprain and strain of unspecified
collateral ligament of knee
S83.5
Sprain and strain involving (anterior)(posterior) cruciate ligament of knee
S83.5 Sprain and strain involving Rupture Other sprain and strain
(anterior)(posterior)cruciate ligament of 
knee 
S83.50 Sprain and strain of anterior cruciate S83.500o S83.501o
ligament of knee 
S83.51 Sprain and strain of posterior cruciate S83.510o S83.511o
ligament of knee 
S83.58 Sprain and strain of other cruciate S83.580o S83.581o
ligaments of knee 
S83.59 Sprain and strain of unspecified cruciate S83.590o S83.591o
ligament of knee 
Includes
• Multiple cruciate ligaments of knee
S83.6 Sprain and strain of other and unspecified parts of knee
     Includes:
    Retinaculum of knee
   Tibiofibular joint and ligament, superior
  Excludes:
 sprain of patellar ligament (S76.1)
S83.7 Injury to multiple structures of knee
     Includes:
    Injury to (lateral)(medial) meniscus in combination with (collateral)(cruciate) ligaments
   Excludes:
  Omit code when specific injuries to knee are known and can be coded separately.
S84
Injury of nerves at lower leg level
Excludes:
injury of nerves at ankle and foot level (S94.-)
S84.0 Injury of (posterior) tibial nerve at lower leg level
S84.00o Laceration of (posterior) tibial nerve at lower leg level
S84.08o Other and unspecified injury of (posterior) tibial nerve at lower leg level
S84.1 Injury of peroneal nerve at lower leg level
S84.10o Laceration of peroneal nerve at lower leg level
S84.18o Other and unspecified injury of peroneal nerve at lower leg level
S84.2 Injury of cutaneous sensory nerve at lower leg level
S84.20o Laceration of cutaneous sensory nerve at lower leg level
S84.28o Other and unspecified injury of cutaneous sensory nerve at lower leg level
S84.7 Injury of multiple nerves at lower leg level
S84.70o Laceration of multiple nerves at lower leg level
825
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S84.78o 
S84.78o
Other and unspecified injury of multiple nerves at lower leg level
S84.8 Injury of other nerves at lower leg level
S84.80o Laceration of other nerves at lower leg level
S84.88o Other and unspecified injury of other nerves at lower leg level
S84.9 Injury of unspecified nerve at lower leg level
S84.90o Laceration of unspecified nerve at lower leg level
S84.98o Other and unspecified injury of unspecified nerve at lower leg level
S85
Injury of blood vessels at lower leg level
Excludes:
injury of blood vessels at ankle and foot level (S95.-)
S85.0 Injury of popliteal artery
S85.1 Injury of (anterior)(posterior) tibial artery
S85.2 Injury of peroneal artery
S85.3 Injury of greater saphenous vein at lower leg level
     Includes:
    Greater saphenous vein NOS
S85.4 Injury of lesser saphenous vein at lower leg level
S85.5 Injury of popliteal vein
S85.7 Injury of multiple blood vessels at lower leg level
S85.8 Injury of other blood vessels at lower leg level
S85.9 Injury of unspecified blood vessel at lower leg level
S86
Injury of muscle and tendon at lower leg level
Excludes:
injury of:
•
muscle and tendon at or below ankle (S96.-)
•
patellar ligament (S76.1)
S86.0 Injury of Achilles tendon
S86.00o Laceration of Achilles tendon
S86.08o Other and unspecified injury of Achilles tendon
S86.1 Injury of other muscle(s) and tendon(s) of posterior muscle group at lower leg level
S86.10o Laceration of other muscle(s) and tendon(s) of posterior muscle group at lower leg level
S86.18o Other and unspecified injury of other muscle(s) and tendon(s) of posterior muscle group at
       lower leg level
S86.2 Injury of muscle(s) and tendon(s) of anterior muscle group at lower leg level
S86.20o Laceration of muscle(s) and tendon(s) of anterior muscle group at lower leg level
S86.28o Other and unspecified injury of muscle(s) and tendon(s) of anterior muscle group at lower leg
       level
S86.3 Injury of muscle(s) and tendon(s) of peroneal muscle group at lower leg level
S86.30o Laceration of muscle(s) and tendon(s) of peroneal muscle group at lower leg level
S86.38o Other and unspecified injury of muscle(s) and tendon(s) of peroneal muscle group at lower leg
       level
S86.7 Injury of multiple muscles and tendons (groups) at lower leg level
S86.70o Laceration of multiple muscles and tendons at lower leg level
S86.78o Other and unspecified injury of multiple muscles and tendons at lower leg level
S86.8 Injury of other muscles and tendons at lower leg level
S86.80o Laceration of other muscles and tendons at lower leg level
S86.88o Other and unspecified injury of other muscles and tendons at lower leg level
826
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S86.9 Injury of unspecified muscle and tendon at lower leg level
S86.90o Laceration of unspecified muscle and tendon at lower leg level
S86.98o Other and unspecified injury of unspecified muscle and tendon at lower leg level
S87
S89.9
Crushing injury of lower leg
Excludes:
crushing injury of ankle and foot (S97.-)
S87.0 Crushing injury of knee
S87.8 Crushing injury of other and unspecified parts of lower leg
S88
Traumatic amputation of lower leg
Excludes:
traumatic amputation of:
•
ankle and foot (S98.-)
•
leg, level unspecified (T13.6)
S88.0 Traumatic amputation at knee level
     Includes:
    Traumatic disarticulation of knee
S88.1 Traumatic amputation at level between knee and ankle
     Includes:
    Traumatic below knee amputation
S88.9 Traumatic amputation of lower leg, level unspecified
S89
Other and unspecified injuries of lower leg
Excludes:
other and unspecified injuries of ankle and foot (S99.-)
S89.7 Multiple injuries of lower leg
     Includes:
    Injuries classifiable to more than one of the categories (S80-S88)
S89.8 Other specified injuries of lower leg
S89.9 Unspecified injury of lower leg
827
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S90
Injuries to the ankle and foot
(S90-S99)
Excludes:
S90
bilateral involvement of ankle and foot (T00-T07)
burns and corrosions (T20-T32)
fracture of ankle and malleolus (S82.-)
frostbite (T33-T35)
injuries of leg, level unspecified (T12-T13)
insect bite or sting, venomous (T63.4)
Superficial injury of ankle and foot
S90.0 Contusion of ankle
S90.1 Contusion of toe(s) without damage to nail
     Includes:
    Contusion of toe(s) NOS
S90.2 Contusion of toe(s) with damage to nail
S90.3 Contusion of other and unspecified parts of foot
S90.7 Multiple superficial injuries of ankle and foot
S90.8 Other superficial injuries of ankle and foot
S90.9 Superficial injury of ankle and foot, unspecified
S91
Open wound of ankle and foot
Includes:
Laceration
Puncture wound
Excludes:
of ankle and foot
traumatic amputation of ankle and foot (S98.-)
S91.0 Open wound of ankle
S91.00o Open wound of ankle, uncomplicated
S91.01o Open wound of ankle, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S91.1 Open wound of toe(s) without damage to nail
     Includes:
    Open wound of toe(s) NOS
S91.10o Open wound of toe(s) without damage to nail, uncomplicated
S91.11o Open wound of toe(s) without damage to nail, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S91.2 Open wound of toe(s) with damage to nail
S91.20o Open wound of toe(s) with damage to nail, uncomplicated
S91.21o Open wound of toe(s) with damage to nail, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S91.3 Open wound of other parts of foot
     Includes:
    Open wound of foot NOS
S91.30o Open wound of other parts of foot, uncomplicated
S91.31o Open wound of other parts of foot, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
S91.7 Multiple open wounds of ankle and foot
S91.70o Multiple open wounds of ankle and foot, uncomplicated
S91.71o Multiple open wounds of ankle and foot, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
828
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S91.72o
S92
Avulsion injury of ankle and foot (skin of)
Fracture of foot, except ankle
Excludes:
S93.000o
ankle (S82.-)
malleolus (S82.-)
S92.0 Fracture of calcaneus
     Includes:
    Heel bone
   Os calcis
S92.000 Fracture of calcaneus, closed
S92.001 Fracture of calcaneus, open
S92.1 Fracture of talus
     Includes:
    Astragalus
S92.100 Fracture of talus, closed
S92.101 Fracture of talus, open
S92.2 Fracture of other tarsal bone(s)
     Includes:
    Cuboid
   Cuneiform, foot (intermediate)(lateral)(medial)
  Navicular, foot
S92.2 Fracture of other tarsal bone(s) Closed Open
S92.20 Fracture of navicular bone S92.200o S92.201o
S92.21 Fracture of cuboid bone S92.210o S92.211o
S92.22 Fracture of cuniform bone S92.220o S92.221o
S92.29 Fracture of unspecified tarsal bone S92.290o S92.291o
S92.3 Fracture of metatarsal bone
S92.300 Fracture of metatarsal bone, closed
S92.301 Fracture of metatarsal bone, open
S92.4 Fracture of great toe
S92.400 Fracture of great toe, closed
S92.401 Fracture of great toe, open
S92.5 Fracture of other toe
S92.500 Fracture of other toe, closed
S92.501 Fracture of other toe, open
S92.7 Multiple fractures of foot
S92.700 Multiple fractures of foot, closed
S92.701 Multiple fractures of foot, open
S92.9 Fracture of foot, unspecified
S92.900 Fracture of foot, unspecified, closed
S92.901 Fracture of foot, unspecified, open
S93
Dislocation, sprain and strain of joints and ligaments at ankle and foot level
S93.0 Dislocation of ankle joint
     Includes:
    Astragalus
   Fibula, lower end
  Talus
 Tibia, lower end
S93.000o Dislocation of ankle joint, closed
829
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S93.001o 
S93.001
Dislocation of ankle joint, open
S93.1 S93.10 Dislocation of toe(s)
            Includes:
           Interphalangeal (joint(s))
          Metatarsophalangeal (joint(s))
         Dislocation of metatarsophalangeal joint
S93.100o Dislocation of metatarsophalangeal joint, closed
S93.101o Dislocation of metatarsophalangeal joint, open
S93.11 Dislocation of (interphalangeal) joint of toe
S93.110o Dislocation of (interphalangeal) joint of toe, closed
S93.111o Dislocation of (interphalangeal) joint of toe, open
S93.2 Rupture of ligaments at ankle and foot level
S93.3 S93.30 Dislocation of other and unspecified parts of foot
            Includes:
           Navicular, foot
          Tarsal (joint(s))
         Tarsometatarsal (joint(s))
        Dislocation of tarsal (midtarsal) joint
S93.300o Dislocation of tarsal (midtarsal) joint, closed
S93.301o Dislocation of tarsal (midtarsal) joint, open
S93.31 Dislocation of tarsometatarsal joint
S93.310o Dislocation of tarsometatarsal joint, closed
S93.311o Dislocation of tarsometatarsal joint, open
S93.4 Sprain and strain of ankle
     Excludes:
    Injury of Achilles tendon (S86.0)
S93.40o Sprain and strain of deltoid ligament, ankle
       Includes:
      Internal (lateral, medial) collateral ligament ankle
     Internal collateral (ligament) ankle
S93.41o Sprain and strain of calcaneofibular ligament, ankle
S93.42o Sprain and strain of distal tibiofibular ligament, ankle
S93.48 Sprain and strain of other ligament of ankle
      Includes:
     Talofibular (ligament)
S93.49o Sprain and strain of ankle, unspecified
       Includes:
      Sprained ankle NOS
S93.5 Sprain and strain of toe(s)
     Includes:
    Interphalangeal (joint(s))
   Metatarsophalangeal (joint(s))
S93.50o Sprain and strain of metatarsophalangeal joint
S93.51o Sprain and strain of (interphalangeal) joint of toe
S93.6 Sprain and strain of other and unspecified parts of foot
     Includes:
    Midtarsal (ligament)
   Tarsal (ligament)
  Tarsometatarsal (ligament)
S94
Injury of nerves at ankle and foot level
S94.0 Injury of lateral plantar nerve
S94.00o Laceration of lateral plantar nerve
S94.08o Other and unspecified injury of lateral plantar nerve
830
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
S94.1 Injury of medial plantar nerve
S94.10o Laceration of medial plantar nerve
S94.18o Other and unspecified injury of medial plantar nerve
S94.2 Injury of deep peroneal nerve at ankle and foot level
     Includes:
    Terminal, lateral branch of deep peroneal nerve
S94.20o Laceration of deep peroneal nerve
S94.28o Other and unspecified injury of deep peroneal nerve
S94.3 Injury of cutaneous sensory nerve at ankle and foot level
S94.30o Laceration of cutaneous sensory nerve at ankle and foot level
S94.38o Other and unspecified injury of cutaneous sensory nerve at ankle and foot level
S94.7 Injury of multiple nerves at ankle and foot level
S94.70o Laceration of multiple nerves at ankle and foot level
S94.78o Other and unspecified injury of multiple nerves at ankle and foot level
S94.8 Injury of other nerves at ankle and foot level
S94.80o Laceration of other nerves at ankle and foot level
S94.88o Other and unspecified injury of other nerves at ankle and foot level
S94.9 Injury of unspecified nerve at ankle and foot level
S94.90o Laceration of unspecified nerve at ankle and foot level
S94.98o Other and unspecified injury of unspecified nerve at ankle and foot level
S95
S96.80o
Injury of blood vessels at ankle and foot level
Excludes:
injury of posterior tibial artery and vein (S85.-)
S95.0 Injury of dorsal artery of foot
S95.1 Injury of plantar artery of foot
S95.2 Injury of dorsal vein of foot
S95.7 Injury of multiple blood vessels at ankle and foot level
S95.8 Injury of other blood vessels at ankle and foot level
S95.9 Injury of unspecified blood vessel at ankle and foot level
S96
Injury of muscle and tendon at ankle and foot level
Excludes:
injury of Achilles tendon (S86.0)
S96.0 Injury of muscle and tendon of long flexor muscle of toe at ankle and foot level
S96.00o Laceration of long flexor muscle and tendon of toe at ankle and foot level
S96.08o Other and unspecified injury of long flexor muscle and tendon of toe at ankle and foot level
S96.1 Injury of muscle and tendon of long extensor muscle of toe at ankle and foot level
S96.10o Laceration of long extensor muscle and tendon of toe at ankle and foot level
S96.18o Other and unspecified injury of long extensor muscle and tendon of toe at ankle and foot level
S96.2 Injury of intrinsic muscle and tendon at ankle and foot level
S96.20o Laceration of intrinsic muscle and tendon at ankle and foot level
S96.28o Other and unspecified injury of intrinsic muscle and tendon at ankle and foot level
S96.7 Injury of multiple muscles and tendons at ankle and foot level
S96.70o Laceration of multiple muscles and tendons at ankle and foot level
S96.78o Other and unspecified injury of multiple muscles and tendons at ankle and foot level
S96.8 Injury of other muscles and tendons at ankle and foot level
S96.80o Laceration of other muscles and tendons at ankle and foot level
831
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S96.88o 
S96.88o
Other and unspecified injury of other muscles and tendons at ankle and foot level
S96.9 Injury of unspecified muscle and tendon at ankle and foot level
S96.90o Laceration of unspecified muscle and tendon at ankle and foot level
S96.98o Other and unspecified injury of unspecified muscle and tendon at ankle and foot level
S97
Crushing injury of ankle and foot
S97.0 Crushing injury of ankle
S97.1 Crushing injury of toe(s)
S97.8 Crushing injury of other parts of ankle and foot
     Includes:
    Crushing injury of foot NOS
S98
Traumatic amputation of ankle and foot
S98.0 Traumatic amputation of foot at ankle level
     Includes:
    Traumatic disarticulation of ankle
S98.1 Traumatic amputation of one toe
S98.2 Traumatic amputation of two or more toes
S98.3 Traumatic amputation of other parts of foot
     Includes:
    Combined traumatic amputation of toe(s) and other parts of foot
   Traumatic midfoot amputation
S98.4 Traumatic amputation of foot, level unspecified
S99
Other and unspecified injuries of ankle and foot
S99.7 Multiple injuries of ankle and foot
     Includes:
    Injuries classifiable to more than one of the categories (S90-S98)
S99.8 Other specified injuries of ankle and foot
S99.9 Unspecified injury of ankle and foot
832
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
Injuries involving multiple body regions
(T00-T07)
Includes:
Excludes:
T00
T00.9
bilateral involvement of limbs of the same body region
injuries by type involving two or more body regions classifiable within S00-S99
burns and corrosions (T20-T32)
frostbite (T33-T35)
insect bite or sting, venomous (T63.4)
multiple injuries involving only one body region - see S-section
sunburn (L55.-)
Superficial injuries involving multiple body regions
T00.0 Superficial injuries involving head with neck
     Includes:
    Multiple superficial injuries involving head with neck
   Superficial injuries of sites classifiable to (S00.-) and (S10.-)
  Excludes:
 with involvement of other body region(s) (T00.8)
T00.1 Superficial injuries involving thorax with abdomen, lower back and pelvis
     Includes:
    Multiple superficial injuries involving thorax with: abdomen, lower back, pelvis
   Superficial injuries of sites classifiable to (S20.-), (S30.-) and (T09.0.-)
  Excludes:
 with involvement of other body region(s) (T00.8)
T00.2 Superficial injuries involving multiple regions of upper limb(s)
     Includes:
    Superficial injuries:
   •
    involving multiple sites of arm, forearm and hand
   •
    of sites classifiable to (S40.-), (S50.-), (S60.-) and (T11.0-)
   Excludes:
  with involvement of:
 •
  lower limb(s) (T00.6)
 •
  thorax, abdomen, lower back and pelvis (T00.8)
T00.3 Superficial injuries involving multiple regions of lower limb(s)
     Includes:
    Superficial injuries:
   •
    involving multiple sites of thigh, leg and foot
   •
    of sites classifiable to (S70.-), (S80.-), (S90.-) and (T13.0-)
   Excludes:
  with involvement of:
 •
  thorax, abdomen, lower back and pelvis (T00.8)
 •
  upper limb(s) (T00.6)
T00.6 Superficial injuries involving multiple regions of upper limb(s) with lower limb(s)
     Includes:
    Superficial injuries:
   •
    involving multiple sites of arm (forearm, hand) with leg (thigh, foot)
   •
    of sites classifiable to (T00.2) and (T00.3)
   Excludes:
  with involvement of thorax, abdomen, lower back and pelvis (T00.8)
T00.8 Superficial injuries involving other combinations of body regions
     Includes:
    Multiple superficial injuries involving every region of the body
T00.9 Multiple superficial injuries, unspecified
     Includes:
    Multiple:
   •
    abrasions NOS
   •
    blisters (nonthermal) NOS
   •
    bruises NOS
   •
    contusions NOS
   •
    haematomas NOS
   •
    insect bites (nonvenomous) NOS
833
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T01
Open wounds involving multiple body regions
Excludes:
T01
traumatic amputations involving multiple body regions (T05.-)
T01.0 Open wound involving head with neck
     Includes:
    Open wounds of sites classifiable to S01.- and S11.-
   Excludes:
  With involvement of other body region(s) (T01.8)
T01.00o Open wound involving head with neck, uncomplicated
T01.01o Open wound involving head with neck, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
T01.1 Open wounds involving thorax with abdomen, lower back and pelvis
     Includes:
    Open wounds of sites classifiable to S21.-, S31.- and T09.1
   Excludes:
  With involvement of other body region(s) (T01.8)
T01.10o Open wounds involving thorax with abdomen, lower back and pelvis, uncomplicated
T01.11o Open wounds involving thorax with abdomen, lower back and pelvis, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
T01.2 Open wounds involving multiple regions of upper limb(s)
     Includes:
    Open wounds of sites classifiable to S41.-, S51.-, S61.- and T11.1
   Excludes:
  With involvement of:
 •
  lower limb(s) (T01.6)
 •
  thorax, abdomen, lower back and pelvis (T01.8)
T01.20o Open wounds involving multiple regions of upper limb(s), uncomplicated
T01.21o Open wounds involving multiple regions of upper limb(s), complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
T01.3 Open wounds of multiple regions of lower limb(s)
     Includes:
    Open wounds of sites classifiable to S71.-, S81.-, S91.- and T13.1
   Excludes:
  With involvement of:
 •
  thorax, abdomen, lower back and pelvis (T01.8)
 •
  upper limb(s) (T01.6)
T01.30o Open wounds of multiple regions of lower limb(s), uncomplicated
T01.31o Open wounds of multiple regions of lower limb(s), complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
T01.6 Open wounds involving multiple regions of upper limb(s) with lower limb(s)
     Includes:
    Open wounds of sites classifiable to T01.2 and T01.3
   Excludes:
  With involvement of thorax, abdomen, lower back and pelvis (T01.8)
T01.60o Open wounds involving multiple regions of upper limb(s) with lower limb(s), uncomplicated
T01.61o Open wounds involving multiple regions of upper limb(s) with lower limb(s), complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
T01.8 Open wounds involving other combinations of body regions
T01.80o Open wounds involving other combinations of body regions, uncomplicated
T01.81o Open wounds involving other combinations of body regions, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
T01.9 Multiple open wounds of unspecified site
     Includes:
    Multiple:
   •
    animal bites NOS
   •
    cuts NOS
   •
    lacerations NOS
   •
    puncture wounds NOS
T01.90o Multiple open wounds of unspecified site, uncomplicated
T01.91o Multiple open wounds of unspecified site, complicated
       Includes:
      Wounds with mention of delayed healing, delayed treatment, foreign body or major infection
834
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T02
Fractures involving multiple body regions
T02.0 T02.00 Fractures involving head with neck, closed
T02.01 Fractures involving head with neck, open
T02.1 Fractures involving thorax with lower back and pelvis
     Includes:
    Fractures of site classifiable to (S22-S32) and (T08)
   Excludes:
  When combined with fractures of:
 •
  limb(s) (T02.7)
 •
  other body region(s) (T02.8)
T02.10 Fractures involving thorax with lower back and pelvis, closed
T02.11 Fractures involving thorax with lower back and pelvis, open
T02.2 Fractures involving multiple regions of one upper limb
     Includes:
    Fractures of sites classifiable to (S42-S52) (S62) and (T10) of one upper limb
   Excludes:
  When combined with fractures of:
 •
  lower limb(s) (T02.6)
 •
  other upper limb (T02.4)
 •
  thorax, lower back and pelvis (T02.7)
T02.20 Fractures involving multiple regions of one upper limb, closed
T02.21 Fractures involving multiple regions of one upper limb, open
T02.3 Fractures involving multiple regions of one lower limb
     Includes:
    Fractures of sites classifiable to (S72-S82) (S92) and (T12) of one lower limb
   Excludes:
  When combined with fractures of:
 •
  other lower limb (T02.5)
 •
  thorax, lower back and pelvis (T02.7)
 •
  upper limb(s) (T02.6)
T02.30 Fractures involving multiple regions of one lower limb, closed
T02.31 Fractures involving multiple regions of one lower limb, open
T02.4 Fractures involving multiple regions of both upper limbs
     Includes:
    Fractures of sites classifiable to (S42-S52) (S62) and (T10) specified as bilateral
   Excludes:
  When combined with fractures of:
 •
  lower limb(s)(T02.6)
 •
  thorax, lower back and pelvis (T02.7)
T02.40 Fractures involving multiple regions of both upper limbs, closed
T02.41 Fractures involving multiple regions of both upper limbs, open
T02.5 Fractures involving multiple regions of both lower limbs
     Includes:
    Fractures of sites classifiable to (S72-S82) (S92) and (T12) specified as bilateral
   Excludes:
  When combined with fractures of:
 •
  thorax, lower back and pelvis (T02.7)
 •
  upper limb(s) (T02.6)
T02.50 Fractures involving multiple regions of both lower limbs, closed
T02.51 Fractures involving multiple regions of both lower limbs, open
T02.6 Fractures involving multiple regions of upper limb(s)
     Excludes:
    When combined with fractures of thorax, lower back and pelvis (T02.7)
T02.60 Fractures involving multiple regions of upper limb(s) with lower limb(s), closed
T02.61 Fractures involving multiple regions of upper limb(s) with lower limb(s), open
T02.7 Fractures involving thorax with lower back and pelvis with limb(s)
T02.70 Fractures involving thorax with lower back and pelvis with limb(s), closed
T02.71 
T02.71
Fractures involving head with neck
Includes:
Fractures of sites classifiable to (S02-S12)
Excludes:
with involvement of other body region(s) (T02.8)
Fractures involving thorax with lower back and pelvis with limb(s), open
835
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T02.8 
T02.8
Fractures involving other combinations of body regions
T02.80 Fractures involving other combinations of body regions, closed
T02.81 Fractures involving other combinations of body regions, open
T02.9 Multiple fractures, unspecified
T02.90 Multiple fractures, unspecified, closed
T02.91 Multiple fractures, unspecified, open
T03
Dislocations, sprains and strains involving multiple body regions
T03.0 Dislocations, sprains and strains involving head with neck
     Includes:
    Dislocations, sprains and strains of sites classifiable to (S03.-) and (S13.-)
   Excludes:
  when combined with dislocations, sprains and strains of other body region(s) (T03.8)
T03.1 Dislocations, sprains and strains involving thorax with lower back and pelvis
     Includes:
    Dislocations, sprains and strains of sites classifiable to (S23.-), (S33.-) and (T09.2)
   Excludes:
  when combined with dislocations, sprains and strains of other body region(s) (T03.8)
T03.2 Dislocations, sprains and strains involving multiple regions of upper limb(s)
     Includes:
    Dislocations, sprains and strains of sites classifiable to (S43.-), (S53.-), (S63.-) and (T11.2)
   Excludes:
  when combined with dislocations, sprains and strains of:
 •
  lower limb(s) (T03.4)
 •
  thorax, lower back and pelvis (T03.8)
T03.3 Dislocations, sprains and strains involving multiple regions of lower limb(s)
     Includes:
    Dislocations, sprains and strains of sites classifiable to (S73.-), (S83.-), (S93.-) and (T13.2)
   Excludes:
  when combined with dislocations, sprains and strains of:
 •
  thorax, lower back and pelvis (T03.8)
 •
  upper limb(s) (T03.4)
T03.4 Dislocations, sprains and strains involving multiple regions of upper limb(s) with lower
     limb(s)
    Excludes:
   when combined with dislocations, sprains and strains of thorax, lower back and pelvis (T03.8)
T03.8 Dislocations, sprains and strains involving other combinations of body regions
T03.9 Multiple dislocations, sprains and strains, unspecified
T04
Crushing injuries involving multiple body regions
T04.0 Crushing injuries involving head with neck
     Includes:
    Crushing injuries of sites classifiable to (S07.-) and (S17.-)
   Excludes:
  with involvement of other body region(s) (T04.8)
T04.1 Crushing injuries involving thorax with abdomen, lower back and pelvis
     Includes:
    Crushing injury of:
   •
    sites classifiable to (S28.-) and (S38.-)
   •
    trunk NOS
   Excludes:
  with involvement of:
 •
  limbs (T04.7)
 •
  other body regions (T04.8)
T04.2 Crushing injuries involving multiple regions of upper limb(s)
     Includes:
    Crushing injury of:
   •
    sites classifiable to (S47.-), (S57.-) and (S67.-)
   •
    upper limb NOS
   Excludes:
  with involvement of:
 •
  lower limb(s) (T04.4)
 •
  thorax, abdomen, lower back and pelvis (T04.7)
836
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T04.3
Crushing injuries involving multiple regions of lower limb(s)
Includes:
Crushing injury of:
•
lower limb NOS
•
sites classifiable to (S77.-), (S87.-) and (S97.-)
Excludes:
with involvement of:
•
thorax, abdomen, lower back and pelvis (T04.7)
•
upper limb(s) (T04.4)
T04.4 Crushing injuries involving multiple regions of upper limb(s) with lower limb(s)
     Excludes:
    with involvement of thorax, abdomen, lower back and pelvis (T04.7)
T04.7 Crushing injuries of thorax with abdomen, lower back and pelvis with limb(s)
T04.8 Crushing injuries involving other combinations of body regions
     Includes:
    Multiple crush injuries involving every body region
T04.9 
T07
Multiple crushing injuries, unspecified
T05
Traumatic amputations involving multiple body regions
Includes:
Excludes:
avulsion involving multiple body regions
decapitation (S18)
open wounds involving multiple body regions (T01.-)
traumatic amputation of:
•
arm NOS (T11.6)
•
leg NOS (T13.6)
•
trunk NOS (T09.6)
T05.0 Traumatic amputation of both hands
T05.1 Traumatic amputation of one hand and other arm [any level, except hand]
T05.2 Traumatic amputation of both arms [any level]
T05.3 Traumatic amputation of both feet
T05.4 Traumatic amputation of one foot and other leg [any level, except foot]
T05.5 Traumatic amputation of both legs [any level]
T05.6 Traumatic amputation of upper and lower limbs, any combination [any level]
T05.8 Traumatic amputations involving other combinations of body regions
     Includes:
    Transection of:
   •
    abdomen
   •
    thorax
T05.9 Multiple traumatic amputations, unspecified
T06
Other injuries involving multiple body regions, not elsewhere classified
T06.0 Injuries of brain and cranial nerves with injuries of nerves and spinal cord at neck level
     Includes:
    Injuries classifiable to (S04.-) and (S06.-) with injuries classifiable to (S14.-)
T06.1 Injuries of nerves and spinal cord involving other multiple body regions
T06.2 Injuries of nerves involving multiple body regions
     Includes:
    Multiple injuries of nerves NOS
   Excludes:
  with spinal cord involvement (T06.0-T06.1)
T06.3 Injuries of blood vessels involving multiple body regions
T06.4 Injuries of muscles and tendons involving multiple body regions
T06.5 Injuries of intrathoracic organs with intra-abdominal and pelvic organs
T06.8 Other specified injuries involving multiple body regions
     Includes:
    multiple types of injuries to multiple body regions
T07
Unspecified multiple injuries
Excludes:
injury NOS (T14.9)
837
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T08
Injuries to unspecified parts of trunk, limb or body region
(T08-T14)
Excludes:
T08
burns and corrosions (T20-T32)
frostbite (T33-T35)
injuries involving multiple body regions (T00-T07)
insect bite or sting, venomous (T63.4)
Fracture of spine, level unspecified
Excludes:
multiple fractures of spine, level unspecified (T02.1)
T08.0 Fracture of spine, level unspecified, closed
T08.1 Fracture of spine, level unspecified, open
T09
Other injuries of spine and trunk, level unspecified
Excludes:
crushing injury of trunk NOS (T04.1)
multiple injuries of trunk (T00-T06)
transection of trunk (T05.8)
T09.0 Superficial injury of trunk, level unspecified
T09.1 Open wound of trunk, level unspecified
T09.5 Injury of unspecified muscle and tendon of trunk
T09.8 Other specified injuries of trunk, level unspecified
T09.9 Unspecified injury of trunk, level unspecified
T10
Fracture of upper limb, level unspecified
Includes:
Excludes:
Broken arm NOS
Fracture of arm NOS
multiple fractures of arm, level unspecified (T02.-)
T10.0 Fracture of upper limb, level unspecified, closed
T10.1 Fracture of upper limb, level unspecified, open
T11
Other injuries of upper limb, level unspecified
Note:
Excludes:
The codes in T11 may not be used if the site of injury is known
crushing injury of upper limb NOS (T04.2)
fracture of upper limb, level unspecified (T10)
injuries involving multiple body regions (T00-T06)
T11.0 Superficial injury of upper limb, level unspecified
     Excludes:
    Superficial injury of:
   •
    elbow and forearm (S50.-)
   •
    shoulder and upper arm (S40.-)
   •
    wrist and hand (S61.-)
T11.1 Open wound of upper limb, level unspecified
     Excludes:
    Open wound of:
   •
    elbow and forearm (S51.-)
   •
    shoulder and upper arm (S41.-)
   •
    wrist and hand (S61.-)
T11.2 Dislocation, sprain and strain of unspecified joint and ligament of upper limb, level
     unspecified
    Excludes:
   Dislocation of:
  •
   elbow (S53.-)
  •
   shoulder (S43.-)
  •
   wrist and hand (S63.-)
838
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T11.3
Injury of unspecified nerve of upper limb, level unspecified
Excludes:
Injury of nerve in:
•
elbow and forearm region (S54.-)
•
shoulder and upper arm region (S44.-)
•
wrist and hand region (S64.-)
T11.4 Injury of unspecified blood vessel of upper limb, level unspecified
     Excludes:
    Injury of blood vessel in:
   •
    elbow and forearm region (S55.-)
   •
    shoulder and upper arm region (S45.-)
   •
    wrist and hand region (S65.-)
T11.5 Injury of unspecified muscle and tendon of upper limb, level unspecified
     Excludes:
    Injury of muscle and tendon of:
   •
    elbow and forearm region (S56.-)
   •
    shoulder and upper arm region (S46.-)
   •
    wrist and hand region (S66.-)
T11.6 Traumatic amputation of upper limb, level unspecified
     Includes:
    Traumatic amputation of arm NOS
   Excludes:
  traumatic:
 •
  amputation:
 •
  above elbow (S48.1)
 •
  below elbow (S58.1)
 •
  of:
 •
  finger (S68.-)
 •
  wrist and hand (S68.-)
 •
  disarticulation through:
 •
  elbow joint (S58.0)
 •
  shoulder joint (S48.0)
T11.8 Other specified injuries of upper limb, level unspecified
     Excludes:
    Other specified injuries of:
   •
    elbow and forearm region (S59.8)
   •
    shoulder and upper arm region (S49.8)
   •
    wrist and hand region (S69.8)
T11.9 
T12.1o
Unspecified injury of upper limb, level unspecified
Includes:
Injury of arm NOS
Excludes:
Unspecified injuries of:
•
 elbow and forearm region (S59.9)
•
 shoulder and upper arm region (S49.9)
•
 wrist and hand region (S69.9)
T12
Fracture of lower limb, level unspecified
Note:
Includes:
Excludes:
The codes in T12 may not be used if the site of the fracture is known
Broken leg NOS
Fracture of leg NOS
Fracture of:
•
ankle (S82.-)
•
femur (S72.-)
•
foot (S92.-)
•
tibia and fibula (S82.-)
multiple fractures of leg, level unspecified (T02.-)
T12.0o Fracture of lower limb, level unspecified, closed
T12.1o Fracture of lower limb, level unspecified, open
839
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T13
Other injuries of lower limb, level unspecified
Note:
Excludes:
T13
The codes in T13 may not be used if the site of the injury is known
crushing injury of lower limb NOS (T04.3)
fracture of lower limb, level unspecified (T12)
injuries involving multiple body regions (T00-T06)
T13.0 Superficial injury of lower limb, level unspecified
     Excludes:
    Superficial injury of:
   •
    ankle and foot (S90.-)
   •
    hip and thigh (S70.-)
   •
    lower leg (S80.-)
T13.1 Open wound of lower limb, level unspecified
     Excludes:
    Open wound of:
   •
    ankle and foot (S91.-)
   •
    hip and thigh (S71.-)
   •
    lower leg (S81.-)
T13.2 Dislocation, sprain and strain of unspecified joint and ligament of lower limb, level unspecified
     Excludes:
    Dislocation, sprain and strain of:
   •
    ankle (S93.-)
   •
    hip (S73.-)
   •
    knee (S83.-)
T13.3 Injury of unspecified nerve of lower limb, level unspecified
     Excludes:
    Injury of nerves at:
   •
    ankle and foot region (S94.-)
   •
    hip and thigh level (S74.-)
   •
    lower leg region (S84.-)
T13.4 Injury of unspecified blood vessel of lower limb, level unspecified
     Excludes:
    Injury of blood vessel at:
   •
    foot and ankle level (S95.-)
   •
    hip and thigh level (S75.-)
   •
    lower leg level (S85.-)
T13.5 Injury of unspecified muscle and tendon of lower limb, level unspecified
     Excludes:
    Injury of muscle and tendon of:
   •
    foot and ankle (S96.-)
   •
    hip and thigh (S76.-)
   •
    lower leg (S86.-)
T13.6 Traumatic amputation of lower limb, level unspecified
     Includes:
    Traumatic amputation of leg NOS
   Excludes:
  Traumatic:
 •
  amputation:
 •
  above knee (S78.1)
 •
  below knee (S88.1)
 •
  of toe (S98.1) toes (S98.2)
 •
  disarticulation of:
 •
  ankle (S98.0)
 •
  hip (S78.0)
 •
  knee (S88.0)
T13.8 Other specified injuries of lower limb, level unspecified
     Excludes:
    Other specified injuries of:
   •
    foot and ankle (S99.8)
   •
    hip and thigh region (S79.8)
   •
    lower leg (S89.8)
T13.9 Unspecified injury of lower limb, level unspecified
     Includes:
    Injury of leg NOS
   Excludes:
  Unspecified injuries of:
 •
  foot and ankle (S99.9)
 •
  hip and thigh region (S79.9)
 •
  lower leg (S89.9)
840
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T14
Injury of unspecified body region
Excludes:
injuries involving multiple body regions (T00-T07)
T14.0 T14.1 Open wound of unspecified body region
           Includes:
          Animal bite NOS
         Cut NOS
        Laceration NOS
       Open wound NOS
      Puncture wound with (penetrating) foreign body NOS
     Excludes:
    Multiple open wounds NOS (T01.9)
   multiple traumatic amputations NOS (T05.9)
  traumatic amputation NOS (T14.7)
T14.2 Fracture of unspecified body region
T14.20 Fracture of unspecified body region, closed
T14.21 Fracture of unspecified body region, open
T14.3 
T14.5
Superficial injury of unspecified body region
Includes:
Abrasion NOS
Blister (nonthermal) NOS
Bruise NOS
Contusion NOS
Haematoma NOS
Injury from superficial foreign body (splinter) without major open wound NOS
Insect bite (nonvenomous) NOS
Superficial injury NOS
Excludes:
multiple superficial injuries NOS (T00.9)
Dislocation, sprain and strain of unspecified body region
Includes:
Traumatic:
•
haemarthrosis
•
rupture
•
subluxation
•
tear
Avulsion
Laceration
Sprain
Strain
Excludes:
of
joint (capsule) NOS
ligament NOS
multiple dislocations, sprains and strains NOS (T03.9)
T14.4 Injury of nerve(s) of unspecified body region
     Includes:
    Injury of nerve NOS
   Traumatic:
  •
   division of nerve NOS
  •
   haematomyelia NOS
  •
   paralysis (transient) NOS
  Excludes:
 multiple injuries of nerves NOS (T06.2)
T14.5 Injury of blood vessel(s) of unspecified body region
     Includes:
Traumatic:
•
aneurysm or fistula (arteriovenous)
•
arterial haematoma
•
rupture
Avulsion
Cut
Injury
Laceration
Excludes:
of blood vessel(s) NOS
multiple injuries of blood vessels NOS (T06.3)
841
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T14.6 Injury of muscles and tendons of unspecified body region
     Includes:
    Avulsion
   Cut
  Injury
 Laceration
of muscle(s) NOS and tendon(s) NOS
Sprain
Strain
Traumatic rupture
Excludes:
multiple injuries of tendons and muscles NOS (T06.4)
T14.7 Crushing injury and traumatic amputation of unspecified body region
     Includes:
    Crushing injury NOS
   Traumatic amputation NOS
  Excludes:
 multiple crushing injuries NOS (T04.9)
traumatic amputations by (T05.9)
T14.8 Other injuries of unspecified body region
T14.9 Injury, unspecified
     Excludes:
    multiple injuries NOS (T07)
T14.6
842
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
Effects of foreign body entering through natural orifice
(T15-T19)
Excludes:
T15
T18.4
foreign body:
•
accidentally left in operation wound (T81.5)
•
in puncture wound - see open wound by body region
•
residual, in soft tissue (M79.5)
splinter, without major open wound - see superficial injury by body region
Foreign body on external eye
Excludes:
foreign body in penetrating wound of:
•
orbit and eyeball (S05.4-S05.5)
•
retained (old) (H05.5)(H44.6-H44.7)
retained foreign body in eyelid (H02.8)
T15.0 Foreign body in cornea
T15.1 Foreign body in conjunctival sac
T15.8 Foreign body in other and multiple parts of external eye
     Includes:
    Foreign body in lacrimal punctum
T15.9 Foreign body on external eye, part unspecified
T16
Foreign body in ear
Includes:
T17
Auditory canal
Foreign body in respiratory tract
Includes:
asphyxia due to foreign body
choked on:
•
food (regurgitated)
•
phlegm
inhalation of liquid or vomitus NOS
T17.0 Foreign body in nasal sinus
T17.1 Foreign body in nostril
     Includes:
    Nose NOS
T17.2 Foreign body in pharynx
     Includes:
    Nasopharynx
   Throat NOS
T17.3 Foreign body in larynx
T17.4 Foreign body in trachea
T17.5 Foreign body in bronchus
T17.8 Foreign body in other and multiple parts of respiratory tract
     Includes:
    Bronchioles
   Lung
T17.9 Foreign body in respiratory tract, part unspecified
T18
Foreign body in alimentary tract
Excludes:
foreign body in pharynx (T17.2)
T18.0 Foreign body in mouth
T18.1 Foreign body in oesophagus
T18.2 Foreign body in stomach
T18.3 Foreign body in small intestine
T18.4 Foreign body in colon
843
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T18.5 
T18.5
Foreign body in anus and rectum
Includes:
Rectosigmoid (junction)
T18.8 Foreign body in other and multiple parts of alimentary tract
T18.9 Foreign body in alimentary tract, part unspecified
     Includes:
    Digestive system NOS
   Swallowed foreign body NOS
T19
Foreign body in genitourinary tract
Excludes:
contraceptive device (intrauterine)(vaginal):
•
mechanical complication of (T83.3)
•
presence of (Z97.5)
T19.0 Foreign body in urethra
T19.1 Foreign body in bladder
T19.2 Foreign body in vulva and vagina
T19.3 Foreign body in uterus [any part]
T19.8 Foreign body in other and multiple parts of genitourinary tract
T19.9 Foreign body in genitourinary tract, part unspecified
844
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
Burns and corrosions
(T20-T32)
Includes:
Excludes:
T20.7
burns:
•
air and hot gases
•
electrical heating appliances
•
electricity
•
flame
•
friction
•
lightning
•
objects
•
radiation
chemical burns [corrosions] (external)(internal)
scalds
erythema [dermatitis] ab igne (L59.0)
radiation-related disorders of the skin and subcutaneous tissue (L55-L59)
sunburn (L55.-)
Burns and corrosions of external body surface, specified by site
(T20-T25)
Includes:
T20
Burns and corrosions of:
•
first degree [erythema]
•
second degree [blisters] [epidermal loss]
•
third degree [deep necrosis of underlying tissue] [full-thickness skin loss]
Burn and corrosion of head and neck
Includes:
ear [any part]
eye with other parts of face, head and neck
lip
nose (septum)
scalp [any part]
temple (region)
Use additional code to identify extent of body surface involvement (T31.-T32.-)
Excludes:
burn and corrosion (of):
•
confined to eye and adnexa (T26.-)
•
mouth and pharynx (T28.-)
T20.0 Burn of unspecified degree of head and neck
T20.1 Burn of first degree of head and neck
T20.2 Burn of second degree of head and neck
T20.3 Burn of third degree of head and neck
T20.4 Corrosion of unspecified degree of head and neck
T20.5 Corrosion of first degree of head and neck
T20.6 Corrosion of second degree of head and neck
T20.7 Corrosion of third degree of head and neck
845
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T21
Burn and corrosion of trunk
Includes:
abdominal wall
anus
back [any part]
breast
buttock
chest wall
flank
groin
interscapular region
labium (majus)(minus)
penis
perineum
scrotum
testis
vulva
Use additional code to identify extent of body surface involvement (T31.-T32.-)
Excludes:
burn and corrosion of:
•
axilla (T22.-)
•
scapular region (T22.-)
T21
T21.0 Burn of unspecified degree of trunk
T21.1 Burn of first degree of trunk
T21.2 Burn of second degree of trunk
T21.3 Burn of third degree of trunk
T21.4 Corrosion of unspecified degree of trunk
T21.5 Corrosion of first degree of trunk
T21.6 Corrosion of second degree of trunk
T21.7 Corrosion of third degree of trunk
T22
Burn and corrosion of shoulder and upper limb, except wrist and hand
Includes:
arm [any part, except wrist and hand alone]
axilla
scapular region
Use additional code to identify extent of body surface involvement (T31.-T32.-)
Excludes:
burn and corrosion of:
•
interscapular region (T21.-)
•
wrist and hand alone (T23.-)
T22.0 Burn of unspecified degree of shoulder and upper limb, except wrist and hand
T22.1 Burn of first degree of shoulder and upper limb, except wrist and hand
T22.2 Burn of second degree of shoulder and upper limb, except wrist and hand
T22.3 Burn of third degree of shoulder and upper limb, except wrist and hand
T22.4 Corrosion of unspecified degree of shoulder and upper limb, except wrist and hand
T22.5 Corrosion of first degree of shoulder and upper limb, except wrist and hand
T22.6 Corrosion of second degree of shoulder and upper limb, except wrist and hand
T22.7 Corrosion of third degree of shoulder and upper limb, except wrist and hand
T23
Burn and corrosion of wrist and hand
Includes:
finger (nail)
palm
thumb (nail)
Use additional code to identify extent of body surface involvement (T31.-T32.-)
T23.0
846
Burn of unspecified degree of wrist and hand
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T23.1 Burn of first degree of wrist and hand
T23.2 Burn of second degree of wrist and hand
T23.3 Burn of third degree of wrist and hand
T23.4 Corrosion of unspecified degree of wrist and hand
T23.5 Corrosion of first degree of wrist and hand
T23.6 Corrosion of second degree of wrist and hand
T23.7 Corrosion of third degree of wrist and hand
T24
T25.7
Burn and corrosion of hip and lower limb, except ankle and foot
Includes:
leg [any part, except ankle and foot alone]
Use additional code to identify extent of body surface involvement (T31.-T32.-)
Excludes:
burn and corrosion of ankle and foot alone (T25.-)
T24.0 Burn of unspecified degree of hip and lower limb, except ankle and foot
T24.1 Burn of first degree of hip and lower limb, except ankle and foot
T24.2 Burn of second degree of hip and lower limb, except ankle and foot
T24.3 Burn of third degree of hip and lower limb, except ankle and foot
T24.4 Corrosion of unspecified degree of hip and lower limb, except ankle and foot
T24.5 Corrosion of first degree of hip and lower limb, except ankle and foot
T24.6 Corrosion of second degree of hip and lower limb, except ankle and foot
T24.7 Corrosion of third degree of hip and lower limb, except ankle and foot
T25
Burn and corrosion of ankle and foot
Includes:
toe(s)
Use additional code to identify extent of body surface involvement (T31.-T32.-)
T25.0 Burn of unspecified degree of ankle and foot
T25.1 Burn of first degree of ankle and foot
T25.2 Burn of second degree of ankle and foot
T25.3 Burn of third degree of ankle and foot
T25.4 Corrosion of unspecified degree of ankle and foot
T25.5 Corrosion of first degree of ankle and foot
T25.6 Corrosion of second degree of ankle and foot
T25.7 Corrosion of third degree of ankle and foot
847
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T26
Burns and corrosions confined to eye and internal organs
(T26-T28)
T26
Burn and corrosion confined to eye and adnexa
Note:
Burns of the eye and adnexa are classified according to the site rather than the degree of the burn.
T26.0 Burn of eyelid and periocular area
T26.1 Burn of cornea and conjunctival sac
T26.2 Burn with resulting rupture and destruction of eyeball
T26.3 Burn of other parts of eye and adnexa
T26.4 Burn of eye and adnexa, part unspecified
     Includes:
    Welder's flash
T26.5 Corrosion of eyelid and periocular area
T26.6 Corrosion of cornea and conjunctival sac
T26.7 Corrosion with resulting rupture and destruction of eyeball
T26.8 Corrosion of other parts of eye and adnexa
T26.9 Corrosion of eye and adnexa, part unspecified
T27
Burn and corrosion of respiratory tract
Note:
Burns of the respiratory tract are classified according to the site rather than the degree of the
burn.
T27.0 Burn of larynx and trachea
T27.1 Burn involving larynx and trachea with lung
     Excludes:
    blast injury syndrome (T70.8)
T27.2 Burn of other parts of respiratory tract
     Includes:
    Thoracic cavity
T27.3 Burn of respiratory tract, part unspecified
T27.4 Corrosion of larynx and trachea
T27.5 Corrosion involving larynx and trachea with lung
T27.6 Corrosion of other parts of respiratory tract
T27.7 Corrosion of respiratory tract, part unspecified
T28
Burn and corrosion of other internal organs
Note:
Burns of internal organs are classified according to the site rather than the degree of the burn
T28.0 Burn of mouth and pharynx
T28.1 Burn of oesophagus
T28.2 Burn of other parts of alimentary tract
T28.3 Burn of internal genitourinary organs
T28.4 Burn of other and unspecified internal organs
T28.5 Corrosion of mouth and pharynx
T28.6 Corrosion of oesophagus
T28.7 Corrosion of other parts of alimentary tract
T28.8 Corrosion of internal genitourinary organs
T28.9 Corrosion of other and unspecified internal organs
848
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
Burns and corrosions of multiple and unspecified body regions
(T29-T32)
T29
T31
Burns and corrosions of multiple body regions
Includes:
burns and corrosions classifiable to more than one of the categories T20-T28
Use additional code to identify extent of body surface involvement (T31.-T32.-)
T29.0 Burns of multiple regions, unspecified degree
     Includes:
    Multiple burns NOS
T29.1 Burns of multiple regions, no more than first-degree burns mentioned
T29.2 Burns of multiple regions, no more than second-degree burns mentioned
T29.3 Burns of multiple regions, at least one burn of third degree mentioned
T29.4 Corrosions of multiple regions, unspecified degree
     Includes:
    Multiple corrosions NOS
T29.5 Corrosions of multiple regions, no more than first-degree corrosions mentioned
T29.6 Corrosions of multiple regions, no more than second-degree corrosions mentioned
T29.7 Corrosions of multiple regions, at least one corrosion of third degree mentioned
T30
Burn and corrosion, body region unspecified
Excludes:
burn and corrosion with statement of the extent of body surface involved (T31.-T32.-)
T30.0 Burn of unspecified body region, unspecified degree
     Includes:
    Burn NOS
T30.1 Burn of first degree, body region unspecified
     Includes:
    First-degree burn NOS
T30.2 Burn of second degree, body region unspecified
     Includes:
    Second-degree burn NOS
T30.3 Burn of third degree, body region unspecified
     Includes:
    Third-degree burn NOS
T30.4 Corrosion of unspecified body region, unspecified degree
     Includes:
    Corrosion NOS
T30.5 Corrosion of first degree, body region unspecified
     Includes:
    First-degree corrosion NOS
T30.6 Corrosion of second degree, body region unspecified
     Includes:
    Second-degree corrosion NOS
T30.7 Corrosion of third degree, body region unspecified
     Includes:
    Third-degree corrosion NOS
T31
Burns classified according to extent of body surface involved
Note:
This category is to be used as the primary code only when the site of the burn is unspecified. It
may be used as a supplementary code with categories (T20-T25, T29) when the site is specified.
Total Body Surface Involved in Burn (any degree)
T31 Less than 20 to 29% 30 to 39% 40 to 49% 50 to 59% 60 to 69% 70 to 79% 80 to 89% More than
Proportion of 10 to 19% 90%
burn that is 10% or 
third degree unspecified 
(choose from 
this column) 
0% or T31.00o T31.20o T31.30o T31.40o T31.50o T31.60o T31.70o T31.80o T31.90o
unspecified 
Less than 10% T31.01o 
10 to 19%
---
T31.10o
T31.11o T31.21o T31.31o T31.41o T31.51o T31.61o T31.71o T31.81o T31.91o
T31.12o T31.22o T31.32o T31.42o T31.52o T31.62o T31.72o T31.82o T31.92o
849
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Total Body Surface Involved in Burn (any degree)
T32
T31
Proportion of
burn that is
third degree
(choose from
this column)
Less than
10 to 19%
10% or
unspecified
20 to 29%
20 to 29% --- --- 30 to 39% --- --- 
T31.23o
---
40 to 49% --- --- ---
30 to 39%
40 to 49%
50 to 59%
60 to 69%
70 to 79%
More than
90%
T31.33o T31.43o T31.53o T31.63o T31.73o T31.83o T31.93o
T31.34o T31.44o T31.54o T31.64o T31.74o T31.84o T31.94o
T31.45o T31.55o T31.65o T31.75o T31.85o T31.95o
---
50 to 59% --- --- --- --- --- 60 to 69% --- --- --- --- --- --- 70 to 79% --- --- --- --- --- --- ---
More than 80% --- --- --- --- --- --- ---
T32
80 to 89%
T31.56o
T31.66o T31.76o T31.86o T31.96o
T31.67o T31.77o T31.87o T31.97o
T31.78o
---
T31.88o T31.98o
T31.89o T31.99o
Corrosions classified according to extent of body surface involved
Note:
This category is to be used as the primary code only when the site of the corrosion is unspecified.
It may be used as a supplementary code with categories (T20-T25, T29) when the site is
specified.
Total Body Surface Involved in Corrosion (any degree)
T32 Less than 20 to 29% 30 to 39% 40 to 49% 50 to 59% 60 to 69% 70 to 79% 80 to 89% More than
Proportion of 10 to 19% 90%
corrosion that 10% or 
is third degree unspecified 
(choose from 
this column) 
0% or T32.00o T32.20o T32.30o T32.40o T32.50o T32.60o T32.70o T32.80o T32.90o
unspecified 
Less than 10% T32.01o 10 to 19% ---
20 to 29% ---
T32.10o
T32.11o T32.21o T32.31o T32.41o T32.51o T32.61o T32.71o T32.81o T32.91o
T32.12o T32.22o T32.32o T32.42o T32.52o T32.62o T32.72o T32.82o T32.92o
T32.23o T32.33o T32.43o T32.53o T32.63o T32.73o T32.83o T32.93o
---
30 to 39% --- --- ---
40 to 49% --- --- ---
T32.34o
---
T32.44o T32.54o T32.64o T32.74o T32.84o T32.94o
T32.45o T32.55o T32.65o T32.75o T32.85o T32.95o
50 to 59% --- --- --- --- --- 60 to 69% --- --- --- --- --- 
T32.56o
--- 70 to 79% --- --- --- --- --- --- ---
More than 80% --- --- --- --- --- --- ---
Frostbite
(T33-T35)
Excludes:
850
hypothermia and other effects of reduced temperature (T68-T69)
T32.66o T32.76o T32.86o T32.96o
T32.67o T32.77o T32.87o T32.97o
T32.78o
---
T32.88o T32.98o
T32.89o T32.99o
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T33
Superficial frostbite
Includes:
Excludes:
frostbite with partial-thickness skin loss
superficial frostbite involving multiple body regions (T35.0)
T33.0 Superficial frostbite of head
T33.1 Superficial frostbite of neck
T33.2 Superficial frostbite of thorax
T33.3 Superficial frostbite of abdominal wall, lower back and pelvis
T33.4 Superficial frostbite of arm
     Excludes:
    superficial frostbite of wrist and hand alone (T33.5)
T33.5 Superficial frostbite of wrist and hand
T33.6 Superficial frostbite of hip and thigh
T33.7 Superficial frostbite of knee and lower leg
     Excludes:
    superficial frostbite of ankle and foot alone (T33.8)
T33.8 Superficial frostbite of ankle and foot
T33.9 
T35.0
Superficial frostbite of other and unspecified sites
Includes:
Superficial frostbite (of):
•
 NOS
•
 leg NOS
•
 trunk NOS
T34
Frostbite with tissue necrosis
Excludes:
frostbite with tissue necrosis involving multiple body regions (T35.1)
T34.0 Frostbite with tissue necrosis of head
T34.1 Frostbite with tissue necrosis of neck
T34.2 Frostbite with tissue necrosis of thorax
T34.3 Frostbite with tissue necrosis of abdominal wall, lower back and pelvis
T34.4 Frostbite with tissue necrosis of arm
     Excludes:
    frostbite with tissue necrosis of wrist and hand alone (T34.5)
T34.5 Frostbite with tissue necrosis of wrist and hand
T34.6 Frostbite with tissue necrosis of hip and thigh
T34.7 Frostbite with tissue necrosis of knee and lower leg
     Excludes:
    frostbite with tissue necrosis of ankle and foot alone (T34.8)
T34.8 Frostbite with tissue necrosis of ankle and foot
T34.9 Frostbite with tissue necrosis of other and unspecified sites
     Includes:
    Frostbite with tissue necrosis (of):
   •
    NOS
   •
    leg NOS
   •
    trunk NOS
T35
T35.0
Frostbite involving multiple body regions and unspecified frostbite
Superficial frostbite involving multiple body regions
Includes:
Multiple superficial frostbite NOS
851
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T35.1 
T35.1
Frostbite with tissue necrosis involving multiple body regions
Includes:
Multiple frostbite with tissue necrosis NOS
T35.2 Unspecified frostbite of head and neck
T35.3 Unspecified frostbite of thorax, abdomen, lower back and pelvis
     Includes:
    Frostbite of trunk NOS
T35.4 Unspecified frostbite of upper limb
T35.5 Unspecified frostbite of lower limb
T35.6 Unspecified frostbite involving multiple body regions
     Includes:
    Multiple frostbite NOS
T35.7 Unspecified frostbite of unspecified site
     Includes:
    Frostbite NOS
852
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
Poisoning by drugs, medicaments and biological substances
(T36-T50)
Includes:
Excludes:
T36
T37.4
overdose of these substances
wrong substance given or taken in error
abuse of non-dependence-producing substances (F55)
adverse effects ["hypersensitivity", "reaction", etc.] of correct substance properly administered; such cases are
to be classified according to the nature of the adverse effect, such as:
•
aspirin gastritis (K29.-)
•
blood disorders (D50-D76)
•
dermatitis:
•
contact (L23-L25)
•
due to substances taken internally (L27.-)
•
nephropathy (N14.0-N14.2)
•
unspecified adverse effect of drug (T88.7)
drug:
•
intoxication meaning inebriation (F10-F19)
•
reaction and poisoning affecting the fetus and newborn (P00-P96)
pathological drug intoxication (F10-F19)
Poisoning by systemic antibiotics
Excludes:
antibiotics:
•
antineoplastic (T45.1)
•
locally applied NEC (T49.0)
•
topically used for:
•
ear, nose and throat (T49.6)
•
eye (T49.5)
T36.0 Poisoning by penicillins
T36.1 Poisoning by cefalosporins and other beta-lactam antibiotics
T36.2 Poisoning by chloramphenicol group
T36.3 Poisoning by macrolides
T36.4 Poisoning by tetracyclines
T36.5 Poisoning by aminoglycosides
     Includes:
    Streptomycin
T36.6 Poisoning by rifamycins
T36.7 Poisoning by antifungal antibiotics, systemically used
T36.8 Poisoning by other systemic antibiotics
T36.9 Poisoning by systemic antibiotic, unspecified
T37
Poisoning by other systemic anti-infectives and antiparasitics
Excludes:
anti-infectives:
•
locally applied NEC (T49.0)
•
topically used (for):
•
ear, nose and throat (T49.6)
•
eye (T49.5)
T37.0 Poisoning by sulfonamides
T37.1 Poisoning by antimycobacterial drugs
     Excludes:
    rifamycins (T36.6)
   streptomycin (T36.5)
T37.2 Poisoning by antimalarials and drugs acting on other blood protozoa
     Excludes:
    hydroxyquinoline derivatives (T37.8)
T37.3 Poisoning by other antiprotozoal drugs
T37.4 Poisoning by anthelminthics
853
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T37.5 Poisoning by antiviral drugs
     Excludes:
    amantadine (T42.8)
   cytarabine (T45.1)
T37.8 Poisoning by other specified systemic anti-infectives and antiparasitics
     Includes:
    Hydroxyquinoline derivatives
   Excludes:
  antimalarial drugs (T37.2)
T37.9 Poisoning by systemic anti-infective and antiparasitic, unspecified
T37.5
T38
Poisoning by hormones and their synthetic substitutes and antagonists, not
elsewhere classified
Excludes:
mineralocorticoids and their antagonists (T50.0)
oxytocic hormones (T48.0)
parathyroid hormones and derivatives (T50.9)
T38.0 Poisoning by glucocorticoids and synthetic analogues
     Excludes:
    glucocorticoids, topically used (T49.-)
T38.1 Poisoning by thyroid hormones and substitutes
T38.2 Poisoning by antithyroid drugs
T38.3 Poisoning by insulin and oral hypoglycaemic [antidiabetic] drugs
T38.4 Poisoning by oral contraceptives
     Includes:
    Multiple- and single-ingredient preparations
T38.5 Poisoning by other estrogens and progestogens
     Includes:
    Mixtures and substitutes
T38.6 Poisoning by antigonadotrophins, antiestrogens, antiandrogens, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Tamoxifen
T38.7 Poisoning by androgens and anabolic congeners
T38.8 Poisoning by other and unspecified hormones and their synthetic substitutes
     Includes:
    Anterior pituitary [adenohypophyseal] hormones
T38.9 Poisoning by other and unspecified hormone antagonists
T39
Poisoning by nonopioid analgesics, antipyretics and antirheumatics
T39.0 Poisoning by salicylates
T39.1 Poisoning by 4-Aminophenol derivatives
T39.2 Poisoning by pyrazolone derivatives
T39.3 Poisoning by other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAID]
T39.4 Poisoning by antirheumatics, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    glucocorticoids (T38.0)
   salicylates (T39.0)
T39.8 Poisoning by other nonopioid analgesics and antipyretics, not elsewhere classified
T39.9 Poisoning by nonopioid analgesic, antipyretic and antirheumatic, unspecified
T40
Poisoning by narcotics and psychodysleptics [hallucinogens]
Excludes:
intoxication meaning inebriation (F10-F19)
T40.0 Poisoning by opium
T40.1 Poisoning by heroin
T40.2 Poisoning by other opioids
     Includes:
    Codeine
   Morphine
T40.3 Poisoning by methadone
854
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T40.4 Poisoning by other synthetic narcotics
     Includes:
    Pethidine
T40.5 Poisoning by cocaine
T40.6 Poisoning by other and unspecified narcotics
T40.7 Poisoning by cannabis (derivatives)
T40.8 Poisoning by lysergide [LSD]
T40.9 Poisoning by other and unspecified psychodysleptics [hallucinogens]
     Includes:
    Mescaline
   Psilocin
  Psilocybine
T41
T42.8
Poisoning by anaesthetics and therapeutic gases
Excludes:
benzodiazepines (T42.4)
cocaine (T40.5)
opioids (T40.0-T40.2)
T41.0 Poisoning by inhaled anaesthetics
     Excludes:
    oxygen (T41.5)
T41.1 Poisoning by intravenous anaesthetics
     Includes:
    Thiobarbiturates
T41.2 Poisoning by other and unspecified general anaesthetics
T41.3 Poisoning by local anaesthetics
T41.4 Poisoning by anaesthetic, unspecified
T41.5 Poisoning by therapeutic gases
     Includes:
    Carbon dioxide
   Oxygen
T42
Poisoning by antiepileptic, sedative-hypnotic and antiparkinsonism drugs
Excludes:
intoxication meaning inebriation (F10-F19)
T42.0 Poisoning by hydantoin derivatives
T42.1 Poisoning by iminostilbenes
     Includes:
    Carbamazepine
T42.2 Poisoning by succinimides and oxazolidinediones
T42.3 Poisoning by barbiturates
     Excludes:
    thiobarbiturates (T41.1)
T42.4 Poisoning by benzodiazepines
T42.5 Poisoning by mixed antiepileptics, not elsewhere classified
T42.6 Poisoning by other antiepileptic and sedative-hypnotic drugs
     Includes:
    Methaqualone
   Valproic acid
  Excludes:
 carbamazepine (T42.1)
T42.7 Poisoning by antiepileptic and sedative-hypnotic drugs, unspecified
     Includes:
    Sleeping:
   •
    draught NOS
   •
    drug NOS
   •
    tablet NOS
T42.8 Poisoning by antiparkinsonism drugs and other central muscle-tone depressants
     Includes:
    Amantadine
855
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T43
Poisoning by psychotropic drugs, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
T43
appetite depressants (T50.5)
barbiturates (T42.3)
benzodiazepines (T42.4)
intoxication meaning inebriation (F10-F19)
methaqualone (T42.6)
psychodysleptics [hallucinogens] (T40.7-T40.9)
T43.0 Poisoning by tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressants
T43.1 Poisoning by monoamine-oxidase-inhibitor antidepressants
T43.2 Poisoning by other and unspecified antidepressants
T43.3 Poisoning by phenothiazine antipsychotics and neuroleptics
T43.4 Poisoning by butyrophenone and thioxanthene neuroleptics
T43.5 Poisoning by other and unspecified antipsychotics and neuroleptics
     Excludes:
    rauwolfia (T46.5)
T43.6 Poisoning by psychostimulants with abuse potential
     Excludes:
    cocaine (T40.5)
T43.8 Poisoning by other psychotropic drugs, not elsewhere classified
T43.9 Poisoning by psychotropic drug, unspecified
T44
Poisoning by drugs primarily affecting the autonomic nervous system
T44.0 Poisoning by anticholinesterase agents
T44.1 Poisoning by other parasympathomimetics [cholinergics]
T44.2 Poisoning by ganglionic blocking drugs, not elsewhere classified
T44.3 Poisoning by other parasympatholytics [anticholinergics and antimuscarinics] and
     spasmolytics, not elsewhere classified
    Includes:
   Papaverine
T44.4 Poisoning by predominantly alpha-adrenoreceptor agonists, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Metaraminol
T44.5 Poisoning by predominantly beta-adrenoreceptor agonists, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    beta-adrenoreceptor agonists used in asthma therapy (T48.6)
T44.6 Poisoning by alpha-adrenoreceptor antagonists, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    ergot alkaloids (T48.0)
T44.7 Poisoning by beta-Adrenoreceptor antagonists, not elsewhere classified
T44.8 Poisoning by centrally acting and adrenergic-neuron-blocking agents, not elsewhere
     classified
    Excludes:
   clonidine (T46.5)
  guanethidine (T46.5)
T44.9 Poisoning by other and unspecified drugs primarily affecting the autonomic nervous system
     Includes:
    Drug stimulating both alpha and beta adrenoreceptors
T45
Poisoning by primarily systemic and haematological agents, not elsewhere
classified
T45.0 Poisoning by antiallergic and antiemetic drugs
     Excludes:
    phenothiazine-based neuroleptics (T43.3)
T45.1 Poisoning by antineoplastic and immunosuppressive drugs
     Includes:
    Antineoplastic antibiotics
   Cytarabine
  Excludes:
 tamoxifen (T38.6)
856
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T45.2
Poisoning by vitamins, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
nicotinic acid (derivatives) (T46.7)
vitamin K (T45.7)
T45.3 Poisoning by enzymes, not elsewhere classified
T45.4 Poisoning by iron and its compounds
T45.5 Poisoning by anticoagulants
T45.6 Poisoning by fibrinolysis-affecting drugs
T45.7 Poisoning by anticoagulant antagonists, vitamin K and other coagulants
T45.8 Poisoning by other primarily systemic and haematological agents
     Includes:
    Liver preparations and other antianaemic agents
   Natural blood and blood products
  Plasma substitute
 Excludes:
immunoglobulin (T50.9)
iron (T45.4)
T45.9 
T47.5
Poisoning by primarily systemic and haematological agent, unspecified
T46
Poisoning by agents primarily affecting the cardiovascular system
Excludes:
metaraminol (T44.4)
T46.0 Poisoning by cardiac-stimulant glycosides and drugs of similar action
T46.1 Poisoning by calcium-channel blockers
T46.2 Poisoning by other antidysrhythmic drugs, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    β-adrenoreceptor antagonists (T44.7)
T46.3 Poisoning by coronary vasodilators, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Dipyridamole
   Excludes:
  β-adrenoreceptor antagonists (T44.7)
  calcium-channel blockers (T46.1)
T46.4 Poisoning by angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors
T46.5 Poisoning by other antihypertensive drugs, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Clonidine
   Guanethidine
  Rauwolfia
 Excludes:
β-adrenoreceptor antagonists (T44.7)
calcium-channel blockers (T46.1)
diuretics (T50.0-T50.2)
T46.6 Poisoning by antihyperlipidaemic and antiarteriosclerotic drugs
T46.7 Poisoning by peripheral vasodilators
     Includes:
    Nicotinic acid (derivatives)
   Excludes:
  papaverine (T44.3)
T46.8 Poisoning by antivaricose drugs, including sclerosing agents
T46.9 Poisoning by other and unspecified agents primarily affecting the cardiovascular system
T47
Poisoning by agents primarily affecting the gastrointestinal system
T47.0 Poisoning by histamine H2-receptor antagonists
T47.1 Poisoning by other antacids and anti-gastric-secretion drugs
T47.2 Poisoning by stimulant laxatives
T47.3 Poisoning by saline and osmotic laxatives
T47.4 Poisoning by other laxatives
     Includes:
    Intestinal atonia drugs
T47.5 Poisoning by digestants
857
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T47.6 
T47.6
Poisoning by antidiarrhoeal drugs
Excludes:
systemic antibiotics and other anti-infectives (T36-T37)
T47.7 Poisoning by emetics
T47.8 Poisoning by other agents primarily affecting the gastrointestinal system
T47.9 Poisoning by agent primarily affecting the gastrointestinal system, unspecified
T48
Poisoning by agents primarily acting on smooth and skeletal muscles and
the respiratory system
T48.0 Poisoning by oxytocic drugs
     Excludes:
    estrogens, progestogens and antagonists (T38.4-T38.6)
T48.1 Poisoning by skeletal muscle relaxants [neuromuscular blocking agents]
T48.2 Poisoning by other and unspecified agents primarily acting on muscles
T48.3 Poisoning by antitussives
T48.4 Poisoning by expectorants
T48.5 Poisoning by anti-common-cold drugs
T48.6 Poisoning by antiasthmatics, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    beta-adrenoreceptor agonists used in asthma therapy
   Salbutamol
  Excludes:
 anterior pituitary [adenohypophyseal] hormones (T38.8)
beta-adrenoreceptor agonists not used in asthma therapy (T44.5)
T48.7 Poisoning by other and unspecified agents primarily acting on the respiratory system
T49
Poisoning by topical agents primarily affecting skin and mucous membrane
and by ophthalmological, otorhinolaryngological and dental drugs
Includes:
glucocorticoids, topically used
T49.0 Poisoning by local antifungal, anti-infective and anti-inflammatory drugs, not elsewhere
     classified
T49.1 Poisoning by antipruritics
T49.2 Poisoning by local astringents and local detergents
T49.3 Poisoning by emollients, demulcents and protectants
T49.4 Poisoning by keratolytics, keratoplastics and other hair treatment drugs and preparations
T49.5 Poisoning by ophthalmological drugs and preparations
     Includes:
    Eye anti-infectives
T49.6 Poisoning by otorhinolaryngological drugs and preparations
     Includes:
    Ear, nose and throat anti-infectives
T49.7 Poisoning by dental drugs, topically applied
T49.8 Poisoning by other topical agents
     Includes:
    Spermicides
T49.9 Poisoning by topical agent, unspecified
858
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T50
Poisoning by diuretics and other and unspecified drugs, medicaments and
biological substances
T50.0 T50.1 Poisoning by loop [high-ceiling] diuretics
T50.2 Poisoning by carbonic-anhydrase inhibitors, benzothiadiazides and other diuretics
     Includes:
    Acetazolamide
T50.3 Poisoning by electrolytic, caloric and water-balance agents
     Includes:
    Oral rehydration salts
T50.4 Poisoning by drugs affecting uric acid metabolism
T50.5 Poisoning by appetite depressants
T50.6 Poisoning by antidotes and chelating agents, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Alcohol deterrents
T50.7 Poisoning by analeptics and opioid receptor antagonists
T50.8 Poisoning by diagnostic agents
T50.9 
T50.9
Poisoning by mineralocorticoids and their antagonists
Poisoning by other and unspecified drugs, medicaments and biological substances
Includes:
Acidifying agents
Alkalizing agents
Immunoglobulin
Immunologicals
Lipotropic drugs
Parathyroid hormones and derivatives
859
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T51
Toxic effects of substances chiefly nonmedicinal as to source
(T51-T65)
Excludes:
T51
corrosions (T20-T32)
localized toxic effects classified elsewhere (A00-R99)
respiratory conditions due to external agents (J60-J70)
Toxic effect of alcohol
T51.0 Toxic effect of ethanol
     Includes:
    Ethyl alcohol
   Excludes:
  acute alcohol intoxication or "hangover" effects (F10.0)
 drunkenness (F10.0)
pathological alcohol intoxication (F10.0)
T51.1 Toxic effect of methanol
     Includes:
    Methyl alcohol
T51.2 Toxic effect of 2-Propanol
     Includes:
    Isopropyl alcohol
T51.3 Toxic effect of fusel oil
     Includes:
    Alcohol:
   •
    amyl
   •
    butyl [1-butanol]
   •
    propyl [1-propanol]
T51.8 Toxic effect of other alcohols
T51.9 Toxic effect of alcohol, unspecified
T52
Toxic effect of organic solvents
Excludes:
halogen derivatives of aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons (T53.-)
T52.0 Toxic effect of petroleum products
     Includes:
    Gasoline [petrol]
   Kerosine [paraffin oil]
  Paraffin wax
 Petroleum:
•
 ether
•
 naphtha
•
 spirits
T52.1 Toxic effect of benzene
     Excludes:
    homologues of benzene (T52.2)
   nitroderivatives and aminoderivatives of benzene and its homologues (T65.3)
T52.2 Toxic effect of homologues of benzene
     Includes:
    Toluene [methylbenzene]
   Xylene [dimethylbenzene]
T52.3 Toxic effect of glycols
T52.4 Toxic effect of ketones
T52.8 Toxic effect of other organic solvents
T52.9 Toxic effect of organic solvent, unspecified
860
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T53
Toxic effect of halogen derivatives of aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons
T53.0 T53.1 Toxic effect of chloroform
           Includes:
          Trichloromethane
T53.2 Toxic effect of trichloroethylene
     Includes:
    Trichloroethene
T53.3 Toxic effect of tetrachloroethylene
     Includes:
    Perchloroethylene
   Tetrachloroethene
T53.4 Toxic effect of dichloromethane
     Includes:
    Methylene chloride
T53.5 Toxic effect of chlorofluorocarbons
T53.6 Toxic effect of other halogen derivatives of aliphatic hydrocarbons
T53.7 Toxic effect of other halogen derivatives of aromatic hydrocarbons
T53.9 
T56.9
Toxic effect of carbon tetrachloride
Includes:
Tetrachloromethane
Toxic effect of halogen derivative of aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons, unspecified
T54
Toxic effect of corrosive substances
T54.0 Toxic effect of phenol and phenol homologues
T54.1 Toxic effect of other corrosive organic compounds
T54.2 Toxic effect of corrosive acids and acid-like substances
     Includes:
    Acid:
   •
    hydrochloric
   •
    sulfuric
T54.3 Toxic effect of corrosive alkalis and alkali-like substances
     Includes:
    Potassium hydroxide
   Sodium hydroxide
T54.9 Toxic effect of corrosive substance, unspecified
T55 Toxic effect of soaps and detergents
T56 Toxic effect of metals
Includes:
Excludes:
fumes and vapours of metals
metals from all sources, except medicinal substances
arsenic and its compounds (T57.0)
manganese and its compounds (T57.2)
thallium (T60.4)
T56.0 Toxic effect of lead and its compounds
T56.1 Toxic effect of mercury and its compounds
T56.2 Toxic effect of chromium and its compounds
T56.3 Toxic effect of cadmium and its compounds
T56.4 Toxic effect of copper and its compounds
T56.5 Toxic effect of zinc and its compounds
T56.6 Toxic effect of tin and its compounds
T56.7 Toxic effect of beryllium and its compounds
T56.8 Toxic effect of other metals
T56.9 Toxic effect of metal, unspecified
861
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T57
T57
Toxic effect of other inorganic substances
T57.0 Toxic effect of arsenic and its compounds
T57.1 Toxic effect of phosphorus and its compounds
     Excludes:
    organophosphate insecticides (T60.0)
T57.2 Toxic effect of manganese and its compounds
T57.3 Toxic effect of hydrogen cyanide
T57.8 Toxic effect of other specified inorganic substances
T57.9 Toxic effect of inorganic substance, unspecified
T58
Toxic effect of carbon monoxide
Includes:
T59
From all sources
Toxic effect of other gases, fumes and vapours
Includes:
Excludes:
aerosol propellants
chlorofluorocarbons (T53.5)
T59.0 Toxic effect of nitrogen oxides
T59.1 Toxic effect of sulfur dioxide
T59.2 Toxic effect of formaldehyde
T59.3 Toxic effect of lacrimogenic gas
     Includes:
    Tear gas
T59.4 Toxic effect of chlorine gas
T59.5 Toxic effect of fluorine gas and hydrogen fluoride
T59.6 Toxic effect of hydrogen sulfide
T59.7 Toxic effect of carbon dioxide
T59.8 Toxic effect of other specified gases, fumes and vapours
T59.9 Toxic effect of gases, fumes and vapours, unspecified
T60
Toxic effect of pesticides
Includes:
wood preservatives
T60.0 Toxic effect of organophosphate and carbamate insecticides
T60.1 Toxic effect of halogenated insecticides
     Excludes:
    chlorinated hydrocarbons (T53.-)
T60.2 Toxic effect of other insecticides
T60.3 Toxic effect of herbicides and fungicides
T60.4 Toxic effect of rodenticides
     Includes:
    Thallium
   Excludes:
  strychnine and its salts (T65.1)
T60.8 Toxic effect of other pesticides
T60.9 Toxic effect of pesticide, unspecified
862
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T61
Toxic effect of noxious substances eaten as seafood
Excludes:
allergic reaction to food, such as:
•
anaphylactic shock due to adverse food reaction (T78.0)
•
dermatitis (L23.6, L25.4, L27.2)
•
gastroenteritis (noninfective) (K52.-)
bacterial foodborne intoxications (A05.-)
toxic effect of food contaminants, such as:
•
aflatoxin and other mycotoxins (T64)
•
cyanides (T65.0)
•
hydrogen cyanide (T57.3)
•
mercury (T56.1)
T61.0 Ciguatera fish poisoning
T61.1 Scombroid fish poisoning
     Includes:
    Histamine-like syndrome
T61.2 Other fish and shellfish poisoning
T61.8 Toxic effect of other seafoods
T61.9 
T63.5
Toxic effect of unspecified seafood
T62
Toxic effect of other noxious substances eaten as food
Excludes:
allergic reaction to food, such as:
•
anaphylactic shock due to adverse food reaction (T78.0)
•
dermatitis (L23.6)(L25.4)(L27.2)
•
gastroenteritis (noninfective) (K52.-)
bacterial foodborne intoxications (A05.-)
toxic effect of food contaminants, such as:
•
aflatoxin and other mycotoxins (T64)
•
cyanides (T65.0)
•
hydrogen cyanide (T57.3)
•
mercury (T56.1)
T62.0 Toxic effect of ingested mushrooms
T62.1 Toxic effect of ingested berries
T62.2 Toxic effect of other ingested (parts of) plant(s)
T62.8 Toxic effect of other specified noxious substances eaten as food
T62.9 Toxic effect of noxious substance eaten as food, unspecified
T63
Toxic effect of contact with venomous animals
T63.0 Toxic effect of snake venom
     Includes:
    Sea-snake venom
T63.1 Toxic effect of venom of other reptiles
     Includes:
    Lizard venom
T63.2 Toxic effect of venom of scorpion
T63.3 Toxic effect of venom of spider
T63.4 Toxic effect of venom of other arthropods
     Includes:
    Insect bite or sting, venomous
T63.5 Toxic effect of contact with fish
     Excludes:
    poisoning by ingestion of fish (T61.0-T61.2)
863
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T63.6 Toxic effect of contact with other marine animals
     Includes:
    Jellyfish
   Sea anemone
  Shellfish
 Starfish
Excludes:
poisoning by ingestion of shellfish (T61.2)
sea-snake venom (T63.0)
T63.8 Toxic effect of contact with other venomous animals
     Includes:
    Venom of amphibian
T63.9 Toxic effect of contact with unspecified venomous animal
T63.6
T64 Toxic effect of aflatoxin and other mycotoxin food contaminants
T65 Toxic effect of other and unspecified substances
T65.0 Toxic effect of cyanides
     Excludes:
    hydrogen cyanide (T57.3)
T65.1 Toxic effect of strychnine and its salts
T65.2 Toxic effect of tobacco and nicotine
T65.3 Toxic effect of nitroderivatives and aminoderivatives of benzene and its homologues
     Includes:
    Aniline [benzenamine]
   Nitrobenzene
  Trinitrotoluene
T65.4 Toxic effect of carbon disulfide
T65.5 Toxic effect of nitroglycerin and other nitric acids and esters
     Includes:
    1,2,3-Propanetriol trinitrate
T65.6 Toxic effect of paints and dyes, not elsewhere classified
T65.8 Toxic effect of other specified substances
T65.9 Toxic effect of unspecified substance
     Includes:
    Poisoning NOS
864
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
Other and unspecified effects of external causes
(T66-T78)
T66
Unspecified effects of radiation
Includes:
Excludes:
T67
T67.9
Radiation sickness
specified adverse effects of radiation, such as:
•
burns (T20-T31)
•
leukaemia (C91-C95)
•
radiation:
•
gastroenteritis and colitis (K52.0)
•
pneumonitis (J70.0)
•
related disorders of the skin and subcutaneous tissue (L55-L59)
•
sunburn (L55.-)
Effects of heat and light
Excludes:
burns (T20-T31)
erythema [dermatitis] ab igne (L59.0)
malignant hyperthermia due to anaesthesia (T88.3)
radiation-related disorders of the skin and subcutaneous tissue (L55-L59)
sunburn (L55.-)
sweat disorders due to heat (L74-L75)
T67.0 Heatstroke and sunstroke
     Includes:
    Heat:
   •
    apoplexy
   •
    pyrexia
   Siriasis
  Thermoplegia
T67.1 Heat syncope
     Includes:
    Heat collapse
T67.2 Heat cramp
T67.3 Heat exhaustion, anhydrotic
     Includes:
    Heat prostration due to water depletion
   Excludes:
  heat exhaustion due to salt depletion (T67.4)
T67.4 Heat exhaustion due to salt depletion
     Includes:
    Heat prostration due to salt (and water) depletion
T67.5 Heat exhaustion, unspecified
     Includes:
    Heat prostration NOS
T67.6 Heat fatigue, transient
T67.7 Heat oedema
T67.8 Other effects of heat and light
T67.9 Effect of heat and light, unspecified
865
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T68
Hypothermia
Includes:
Excludes:
T68
T69
Accidental hypothermia
frostbite (T33-T35)
hypothermia (of):
•
following anaesthesia (T88.5)
•
newborn (P80.-)
•
not associated with low environmental temperature (R68.0)
Other effects of reduced temperature
Excludes:
frostbite (T33-T35)
T69.0 Immersion hand and foot
     Includes:
    Trench foot
T69.1 Chilblains
T69.8 Other specified effects of reduced temperature
T69.9 Effect of reduced temperature, unspecified
T70
Effects of air pressure and water pressure
T70.0 Otitic barotrauma
     Includes:
    Aero-otitis media
   Effects of change in ambient atmospheric pressure or water pressure on ears
T70.1 Sinus barotrauma
     Includes:
    Aerosinusitis
   Effects of change in ambient atmospheric pressure on sinuses
T70.2 Other and unspecified effects of high altitude
     Includes:
    Alpine sickness
   Anoxia due to high altitude
  Barotrauma NOS
 Hypobaropathy
Mountain sickness
Excludes:
polycythaemia due to high altitude (D75.1)
T70.3 Caisson disease [decompression sickness]
     Includes:
    Compressed-air disease
   Diver's palsy or paralysis
T70.4 Effects of high-pressure fluids
     Includes:
    Traumatic jet injection (industrial)
T70.8 Other effects of air pressure and water pressure
     Includes:
    Blast injury syndrome
T70.9 Effect of air pressure and water pressure, unspecified
T71
Asphyxiation
Includes:
Excludes:
866
Suffocation (by strangulation)
Systemic oxygen deficiency due to:
•
low oxygen content in ambient air
•
mechanical threat to breathing
anoxia due to high altitude (T70.2)
asphyxia from:
•
carbon monoxide (T58)
•
inhalation of food or foreign body (T17.-)
•
other gases, fumes and vapours (T59.-)
respiratory distress:
•
in newborn (P22.-)
•
syndrome of adult (J80)
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T73
Effects of other deprivation
T73.0 T73.1 Effects of thirst
           Includes:
          Deprivation of water
T73.2 Exhaustion due to exposure
T73.3 Exhaustion due to excessive exertion
     Includes:
    Overexertion
T73.8 Other effects of deprivation
T73.9 
T75.3
Effects of hunger
Includes:
Deprivation of food
Starvation
Effect of deprivation, unspecified
T74
Maltreatment syndromes
Use additional code, to identify current injury.
T74.0 Neglect or abandonment
T74.1 Physical abuse
     Includes:
    baby or child syndrome NOS
   spouse syndrome NOS
T74.2 Sexual abuse
T74.3 Psychological abuse
T74.8 Other maltreatment syndromes
     Includes:
    Mixed forms
T74.9 Maltreatment syndrome, unspecified
     Includes:
    Effects of:
   •
    abuse of adult NOS
   •
    child abuse NOS
T75
Effects of other external causes
Excludes:
adverse effects NEC (T78.-)
burns (electric) (T20-T31)
T75.0 Effects of lightning
     Includes:
    Shock from lightning
   Struck by lightning NOS
T75.1 Drowning and nonfatal submersion
     Includes:
    Immersion
   Swimmer's cramp
T75.2 Effect of vibration
T75.20o Pneumatic hammer syndrome
T75.21o Traumatic vasospastic syndrome
T75.22o Vertigo from infrasound
T75.28o Other effects of vibration
T75.29o Unspecified effects of vibration
T75.3 Motion sickness
     Includes:
    Airsickness
   Seasickness
  Travel sickness
867
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T75.4 Effects of electric current
     Includes:
    Electrocution
   Shock from electric current
T75.8 Other specified effects of external causes
     Includes:
    Effects of:
   •
    abnormal gravitation [G] forces
   •
    weightlessness
T75.80o Effects from abnormal gravitation [G] forces
T75.81o Effect of weightlessness
T75.88o Other specified effects of external causes
T75.4
T78
Adverse effects, not elsewhere classified
Note:
Excludes:
This category is to be used as the primary code to identify the effects, not elsewhere classifiable,
of unknown, undetermined or ill-defined causes. For multiple coding purposes this category may
be used as an additional code to identify the effects of conditions classified elsewhere.
complications of surgical and medical care NEC (T80-T88)
T78.0 Anaphylactic shock due to adverse food reaction
T78.00o Anaphylactic shock due to peanuts
T78.01o Anaphylactic shock due to shell fish (crustaceans)
T78.02o Anaphylactic shock due to other fish
T78.03o Anaphylactic shock due to fruits and vegetables
T78.04o Anaphylactic shock due to tree nuts & seeds
T78.05o Anaphylactic shock due to food additives
T78.06o Anaphylactic shock due to milk and dairy products
T78.07o Anaphylactic shock due to eggs
T78.08o Anaphylactic shock due to other food products
T78.09o Anaphylactic shock due to unspecified food products
T78.1 Other adverse food reactions, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    bacterial foodborne intoxications (A05.-)
   dermatitis due to food (L27.2):
  •
   in contact with the skin (L23.6, L24.6, L25.4)
T78.2 Anaphylactic shock, unspecified
     Includes:
    Allergic shock NOS
   Anaphylactic reaction NOS
  Anaphylaxis NOS
 Excludes:
anaphylactic shock due to:
•
 adverse effect of correct medicinal substance properly administered (T88.6)
•
 adverse food reaction (T78.0)
•
 serum (T80.5)
868
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T78.3
Angioneurotic oedema
Includes:
Giant urticaria
Quincke's oedema
Excludes:
serum (T80.6)
urticaria (L50.-)
T78.4 Allergy, unspecified
     Includes:
    Allergic reaction NOS
   Environmental illness syndrome
  Hypersensitivity NOS
 Idiosyncracy NOS
Total allergy syndrome
Excludes:
allergic reaction NOS to correct medicinal substance properly administered (T88.7)
specified types of allergic reaction such as:
•
 allergic gastroenteritis and colitis (K52.2)
•
 dermatitis (L23-L25, L27.-)
•
 hay fever (J30.1)
T78.8 Other adverse effects, not elsewhere classified
T78.9 
T78.9
Adverse effect, unspecified
Excludes:
adverse effect of surgical and medical care NOS (T88.9)
869
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T79
Certain early complications of trauma
(T79)
T79
Certain early complications of trauma, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
complications of surgical and medical care NEC (T80-T88)
respiratory distress:
•
in newborn (P22.-)
•
syndrome of adult (J80)
when occurring during or following medical procedures (T80-T88)
T79.0 Air embolism (traumatic)
     Excludes:
    air embolism complicating:
   •
    abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07, O08.2)
   •
    pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O88.0)
T79.1 Fat embolism (traumatic)
     Excludes:
    fat embolism complicating:
   •
    abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07, O08.2)
   •
    pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O88.8)
T79.2 Traumatic secondary and recurrent haemorrhage
T79.3 Post-traumatic wound infection, not elsewhere classified
     Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
T79.4 Traumatic shock
     Includes:
    Shock (immediate)(delayed) following injury
   Excludes:
  shock:
 •
  anaesthetic (T88.2)
 •
  anaphylactic:
 •
  NOS (T78.2)
 •
  due to:
 •
  adverse food reaction (T78.0)
 •
  correct medicinal substance properly administered (T88.6)
 •
  serum (T80.5)
 •
  complicating abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07, O08.3)
 •
  electric (T75.4)
 •
  lightning (T75.0)
 •
  nontraumatic NEC (R57.-)
 •
  obstetric (O75.1)
 •
  postoperative (T81.1)
T79.5 Traumatic anuria
     Includes:
    Crush syndrome
   Renal failure following crushing
T79.6 Traumatic ischaemia of muscle
     Includes:
    Abdominal compartment syndrome (traumatic)
   Compartment syndrome
  Volkmann's ischaemic contracture
 Excludes:
anterior tibial syndrome (M76.8)
non-traumatic abdominal compartment syndrome (M62.2-)
T79.7 Traumatic subcutaneous emphysema
     Excludes:
    emphysema (subcutaneous) resulting from a procedure (T81.81)
T79.8 Other early complications of trauma
T79.9 Unspecified early complication of trauma
870
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
Complications of surgical and medical care, not elsewhere
classified
(T80-T88)
T80.4
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify infectious agent.
Use additional external cause code (Chapter XX) to identify devices involved and details of circumstances.
Excludes:
Adverse effects of drugs and medicaments (A00-R99, T78.-)
any encounters with medical care for postoperative conditions in which no complications are present, such as:
•
artificial opening status (Z93.-)
•
closure of external stoma (Z43.-)
•
fitting and adjustment of external prosthetic device (Z44.-)
burns and corrosions from local applications and irradiation (T20-T32)
complications of surgical procedures during pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O00-O99)
poisoning and toxic effects of drugs and chemicals (T36-T65)
specified complications classified elsewhere, such as:
•
cerebrospinal fluid leak from spinal puncture (G96.0)
•
colostomy malfunction (K91.4)
•
disorders of fluid and electrolyte balance (E86-E87)
•
functional disturbances following cardiac surgery (I97.0-I97.1)
•
postgastric surgery syndromes (K91.1)
•
postlaminectomy syndrome NEC (M96.1)
•
postmastectomy lymphoedema syndrome (I97.2)
•
postsurgical blind-loop syndrome (K91.2)
T80
Complications following infusion, transfusion and therapeutic injection
Includes:
Excludes:
Perfusion
bone-marrow transplant rejection (T86.0)
transfusion related acute lung injury (TRALI) (J95.81)
T80.0 Air embolism following infusion, transfusion and therapeutic injection
T80.1 Vascular complications following infusion, transfusion and therapeutic injection
     Includes:
    Phlebitis
   Thromboembolism
  following infusion, transfusion and therapeutic injection
 Thrombophlebitis
Excludes:
the listed conditions when specified as:
•
 due to prosthetic devices, implants and grafts (T82.8, T83.8, T84.8, T85.8)
•
 postprocedural (T81.7)
T80.2 Infections following infusion, transfusion and therapeutic injection
     Includes:
Infection
Sepsis
following infusion, transfusion and therapeutic injection
Use additional code (R57.2) to identify septic shock
Excludes:
the listed conditions when specified as:
•
due to prosthetic devices, implants and grafts (T82.6-T82.7, T83.5-T83.6, T84.5-T84.7, T85.7)
•
postprocedural (T81.4)
T80.3 ABO incompatibility reaction
     Includes:
    Incompatible blood transfusion
   Reaction to blood-group incompatibility in infusion or transfusion
T80.4 Rh incompatibility reaction
     Includes:
    Reaction due to Rh factor in infusion or transfusion
871
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T80.5 Anaphylactic shock due to serum
     Excludes:
    shock:
   •
    allergic NOS (T78.2)
   •
    anaphylactic:
   •
    NOS (T78.2)
   •
    due to adverse effect of correct medicinal substance properly administered (T88.6)
T80.6 Other serum reactions
     Includes:
    Intoxication by serum
   Protein sickness
  Serum:
 •
  rash
 •
  sickness
 •
  urticaria
 Excludes:
serum hepatitis (B16.-)
T80.8 Other complications following infusion, transfusion and therapeutic injection
T80.9 Unspecified complication following infusion, transfusion and therapeutic injection
     Includes:
    Transfusion reaction NOS
T80.5
T81
Complications of procedures, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
adverse effect of drug NOS (T88.7)
complication following:
•
immunization (T88.0-T88.1)
•
infusion, transfusion and therapeutic injection (T80.-)
specified complications classified elsewhere, such as:
•
complications of prosthetic devices, implants and grafts (T82-T85)
•
dermatitis due to drugs and medicaments (L23.3, L24.4, L25.1, L27.0-L27.1)
•
failure and rejection of transplanted organs and tissues (T86)
•
poisoning and toxic effects of drugs and chemicals (T36-T65)
transfusion related acute lung injury (TRALI) (J95.81)
T81.0 Haemorrhage and haematoma complicating a procedure, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Haemorrhage at any site resulting from a procedure
   Excludes:
  haematoma of obstetric wound (O90.2)
 haemorrhage due to prosthetic devices, implants and grafts (T82.8, T83.8, T84.8, T85.8)
T81.1 Shock during or resulting from a procedure, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Collapse NOS
   during or following a procedure
  Shock (endotoxic) (hypovolaemic)
Postoperative shock NOS
Use additional code (R57.2) to identify septic shock
Excludes:
shock:
•
anaesthetic (T88.2)
•
anaphylactic:
•
NOS (T78.2)
•
due to:
•
correct medicinal substance properly administered (T88.6)
•
serum (T80.5)
•
electric (T75.4)
•
following abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07)(O08.3)
•
obstetric (O75.1)
•
traumatic (T79.4)
872
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T81.2
Accidental puncture and laceration during a procedure, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Accidental perforation of:
catheter
•
blood vessel
endoscope
•
nerve
by
during a procedure
instrument
•
organ
probe
Excludes:
T81.3
T81.6
damage from instruments during delivery and Caesarean section (O70-O71)
perforation, puncture or laceration caused by device or implant intentionally left in operation
wound (T82-T85)
specified complications classified elsewhere, such as broad ligament laceration syndrome
[Allen-Masters] (N83.8)
Disruption of operation wound, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Dehiscence
of operation wound
Rupture
Excludes:
disruption of:
•
caesarean-section wound (O90.0)
•
perineal obstetric wound (O90.1)
T81.4 Infection following a procedure, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    abscess:
   •
    intra-abdominal postprocedural
   •
    stitch postprocedural
   •
    subphrenic postprocedural
   •
    wound postprocedural
   Sepsis postprocedural
  Use additional code to identify other manifestations of infection, such as abscess or sepsis.
 Excludes:
infection due to:
•
 infusion, transfusion and therapeutic injection (T80.2)
•
 prosthetic devices, implants and grafts (T82.6-T82.7) (T83.5-T83.6) (T84.5-T84.7T84.5)
(T85.7)
obstetric surgical wound infection (O86.0)
specified infections classified elsewhere, such as:
•
 cholangitis (K83.0)
•
 pneumonia (J12-J18)
T81.5 Foreign body accidentally left in body cavity or operation wound following a procedure
     Excludes:
    obstruction or perforation due to prosthetic devices and implants intentionally left in body
   (T82.0-T82.5)(T83.0-T83.4)(T84.0-T84.4)(T85.0-T85.6)
T81.50o Adhesions due to foreign body accidentally left in body cavity or operation wound following
       procedure
T81.51o Obstruction due to foreign body accidentally left in body cavity or operation wound following
       procedure
T81.52o Perforation due to foreign body accidentally left in body cavity or operation wound following
       a procedure
T81.58o Other specified complication due to foreign body left in body cavity or operation wound
       following a procedure
T81.59o Unspecified complication due to foreign body accidentally left in body cavity or operation
       wound following a procedure
T81.6 Acute reaction to foreign substance accidentally left during a procedure
     Includes:
    Peritonitis:
   •
    aseptic
   •
    chemical
873
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T81.7 Vascular complications following a procedure, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Air embolism following procedure NEC
   Use additional code to identify pulmonary embolism (I26.9) or DVT (I80.2)
  Excludes:
 embolism complicating:
•
 abortion or ectopic or molar pregnancy (O00-O07)(O08.2)
•
 due to prosthetic devices, implants and grafts (T82.8)(T83.8)(T84.8)(T85.8)
•
 following infusion, transfusion and therapeutic injection (T80.0)
•
 pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium (O88.-)
•
 traumatic (T79.0)
T81.8 Other complications of procedures, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    hypothermia following anaesthesia (T88.5)
   malignant hyperthermia due to anaesthesia (T88.3)
T81.80o Complication of inhalation therapy
       Excludes:
      Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) (J95.88)
T81.81o Emphysema (subcutaneous) resulting from a procedure
T81.82o Persistent postoperative fistula
T81.88o Other complications of procedures, not elsewhere classified
       Includes:
      Wound (stitch) granuloma
T81.9 Unspecified complication of procedure
T81.7
T82
Complications of cardiac and vascular prosthetic devices, implants and
grafts
Excludes:
failure and rejection of transplanted organs and tissues (T86.-)
T82.0 Mechanical complication of heart valve prosthesis
     Includes:
    Breakdown (mechanical)
   Displacement
  Leakage
 Malposition
due to heart valve prosthesis
Obstruction, mechanical
Perforation
Protrusion
T82.1 Mechanical complication of cardiac electronic device
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to:
   •
    electrodes
   •
    pulse generator (battery)
T82.2 Mechanical complication of coronary artery bypass and valve grafts
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to coronary artery bypass and valve grafts
T82.3 Mechanical complication of other vascular grafts
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to:
   •
    aortic (bifurcation) graft (replacement)
   •
    arterial (carotid) (femoral) graft (bypass)
T82.4 Mechanical complication of vascular dialysis catheter
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to vascular dialysis catheter
   Excludes:
  mechanical complication of intraperitoneal dialysis catheter (T85.6)
874
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T82.5
Mechanical complication of other cardiac and vascular devices and implants
Includes:
Conditions listed in T82.0 due to:
•
arteriovenous:
•
fistula surgically created
•
shunt surgically created
•
artificial heart
•
balloon (counterpulsation) device
•
infusion catheter
•
umbrella device
Excludes:
mechanical complication of epidural and subdural infusion catheter (T85.6)
T82.6 Infection and inflammatory reaction due to cardiac valve prosthesis
T82.7 Infection and inflammatory reaction due to other cardiac and vascular devices, implants and
     grafts
T82.8 
T83.9
Other specified complications of cardiac and vascular prosthetic devices, implants and grafts
Includes:
Embolism
Fibrosis
Haemorrhage
Pain
Stenosis
Thrombosis
due to cardiac and vascular prosthetic devices, implants and grafts
Use additional code to identify specific complication.
T82.9
T83
Unspecified complication of cardiac and vascular prosthetic device, implant and graft
Complications of genitourinary prosthetic devices, implants and grafts
Excludes:
failure and rejection of transplanted organs and tissues (T86.-)
T83.0 Mechanical complication of urinary (indwelling) catheter
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to:
   •
    catheter:
   •
    cystostomy
   •
    urethral, indwelling
T83.1 Mechanical complication of other urinary devices and implants
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to:
   •
    urinary:
   •
    electronic stimulator device
   •
    sphincter implant
   •
    stent
T83.2 Mechanical complication of graft of urinary organ
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to graft of urinary organ
T83.3 Mechanical complication of intrauterine contraceptive device
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to intrauterine contraceptive device
T83.4 Mechanical complication of other prosthetic devices, implants and grafts in genital tract
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to (implanted) penile prosthesis
T83.5 Infection and inflammatory reaction due to prosthetic device, implant and graft in urinary
     system
T83.6 Infection and inflammatory reaction due to prosthetic device, implant and graft in genital tract
T83.8 Other complications of genitourinary prosthetic devices, implants and grafts
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.8 due to genitourinary prosthetic devices, implants and grafts
T83.9 Unspecified complication of genitourinary prosthetic device, implant and graft
875
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T84
T84
Complications of internal orthopaedic prosthetic devices, implants and
grafts
Excludes:
failure and rejection of transplanted organs and tissues (T86.-)
fracture of bone following insertion of orthopaedic implant, joint prosthesis or bone plate
(M96.6)
T84.0 Mechanical complication of internal joint prosthesis
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to joint prosthesis
T84.00o Mechanical complication of shoulder prosthesis
T84.01o Mechanical complication of elbow prosthesis
T84.02o Mechanical complication of wrist, carpal and interphalangeal prosthesis
T84.03o Mechanical complication of hip prosthesis
T84.04o Mechanical complication of knee prosthesis
T84.05o Mechanical complication of ankle and tarsal prosthesis
T84.08o Mechanical complication of other joint prosthesis
T84.09o Mechanical complication of unspecified joint prosthesis
T84.1 Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of bones of limb
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to internal fixation device of bones of limb
T84.10o Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of humerus
T84.11o Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of radius and ulna
T84.12o Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of bones of hand
T84.13o Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of femur
T84.14o Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of tibia and fibula
T84.15o Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of bones of foot
T84.19o Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of bones of limb NOS
T84.2 Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of other bones
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to internal fixation device of other bones
T84.20o Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of cranium
T84.21o Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of maxilla
T84.22o Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of mandible
T84.23o Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of spinal vertebrae
T84.24o Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of pelvis
T84.28o Mechanical complication of internal fixation device of other bones
T84.3 Mechanical complication of other bone devices, implants and grafts
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to:
   •
    bone graft
   •
    electronic bone stimulator
T84.4 Mechanical complication of other internal orthopaedic devices, implants and grafts
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to muscle and tendon graft
T84.5 Infection and inflammatory reaction due to internal joint prosthesis
T84.50o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to shoulder prosthesis
T84.51o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to elbow prosthesis
T84.52o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to wrist, carpal and interphalangeal prosthesis
T84.53o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to hip prosthesis
T84.54o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to knee prosthesis
T84.55o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to ankle and tarsal prosthesis
876
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T84.58o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to other joint prosthesis
T84.59o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to unspecified joint prosthesis
T84.6 Infection and inflammatory reaction due to internal fixation device [any site]
T84.60o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to internal fixation device of humerus
T84.61o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to internal fixation device of radius and ulna
T84.62o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to internal fixation device of bones of hand
T84.63o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to internal fixation device of femur
T84.64o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to internal fixation device of tibia and fibula
T84.65o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to internal fixation device of bones of foot
T84.68o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to internal fixation device of bones at other site
T84.69o Infection and inflammatory reaction due to internal fixation device of bones of limb NOS
T84.7 Infection and inflammatory reaction due to other internal orthopaedic prosthetic devices,
     implants and grafts
T84.8 Other complications of internal orthopaedic prosthetic devices, implants and grafts
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.8 due to internal orthopaedic prosthetic devices, implants and grafts
T84.9 Unspecified complication of internal orthopaedic prosthetic device, implant and graft
T85
T85.7
Complications of other internal prosthetic devices, implants and grafts
Excludes:
failure and rejection of transplanted organs and tissues (xenograft) (homograft) (allograft)
(T86.-)
T85.0 Mechanical complication of ventricular intracranial (communicating) shunt
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to ventricular intracranial (communicating) shunt
T85.1 Mechanical complication of implanted electronic stimulator of nervous system
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to electronic neurostimulator (electrode) of:
   •
    brain
   •
    peripheral nerve
   •
    spinal cord
T85.2 Mechanical complication of intraocular lens
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to intraocular lens
T85.3 Mechanical complication of other ocular prosthetic devices, implants and grafts
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to:
   •
    corneal graft
   •
    prosthetic orbit of eye
T85.4 Mechanical complication of breast prosthesis and implant
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to breast prosthesis and implant
T85.5 Mechanical complication of gastrointestinal prosthetic devices, implants and grafts
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to:
   •
    bile-duct prosthesis
   •
    oesophageal anti-reflux device
T85.6 Mechanical complication of other specified internal prosthetic devices, implants and grafts
     Includes:
    Conditions listed in T82.0 due to:
   •
    epidural and subdural infusion catheter
   •
    intraperitoneal dialysis catheter
   •
    nonabsorbable surgical material NOS
   •
    permanent sutures
   Excludes:
  mechanical complication of permanent (wire) suture used in bone repair (T84.1-T84.2-)
T85.7 Infection and inflammatory reaction due to other internal prosthetic devices, implants and
     grafts
877
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T85.8 Other complications of internal prosthetic devices, implants and grafts, not elsewhere
     classified
    Includes:
   Conditions listed in T82.8 due to internal prosthetic devices, implants and grafts NEC
T85.9 Unspecified complication of internal prosthetic device, implant and graft
     Includes:
    Complication of internal prosthetic device, implant and graft NOS
T85.8
T86
Failure and rejection of transplanted organs and tissues
Excludes:
haemorrhage and haematoma complicating a procedure (T81.0)
infection following a procedure (T81.4)
T86.0 Bone-marrow transplant rejection
     Includes:
    Graft-versus-host reaction or disease
T86.000o Bone-marrow transplant rejection
T86.001o Graft-versus-host reaction or disease
T86.1 Kidney transplant failure and rejection
T86.100o Kidney transplant rejection
T86.101o Kidney transplant failure
T86.2 Heart transplant failure and rejection
     Excludes:
    complication of artificial heart device (T82.5)
   Complication of heart-lung transplant (T86.3)
T86.200o Heart transplant rejection
T86.201o Heart transplant failure
T86.3 Heart-lung transplant failure and rejection
T86.300o Heart-lung transplant rejection
T86.301o Heart-lung transplant failure
T86.4 Liver transplant failure and rejection
T86.400o Liver transplant rejection
T86.401o Liver transplant failure
T86.8 Failure and rejection of other transplanted organs and tissues
     Includes:
    Transplant (homograft) (xenograft) failure or rejection of:
   •
    bone (allograft) (homograft)
   •
    intestine
   •
    lung
   •
    pancreas
   •
    skin (allograft) (homograft) (xenograft)
T86.8 Failure and rejection of other transplanted organs Rejection Failure
and tissues 
T86.80 Failure and rejection of lung transplant T86.800o T86.801o
T86.81 T86.810o T86.811o
Failure and rejection of pancreas (and duodenum) 
transplant 
T86.82 Failure and Rejection of bone graft/flap T86.820o T86.821o
T86.83 Failure and Rejection of cornea transplant T86.830o T86.831o
T86.84 T86.841o
Failure and Rejection of soft tissue (skin, muscle, fascia, T86.840o 
tendon, mucosa) graft/flap 
T86.88 T86.881o
T86.9
878
Failure and Rejection of other transplanted tissue
T86.880o
Failure and rejection of unspecified transplanted organ and tissue
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T87
T87.0
Complications peculiar to reattachment and amputation
T87.46o
Complication of reattached (part of) upper extremity
T87.0 Complication of reattached (part Rejection Infection Other Unspecified
of) upper extremity complication complication
T87.00 Complication of above elbow T87.000o T87.001o T87.008o T87.009o
reattachment 
T87.01 Complication of below elbow T87.010o T87.011o T87.018o T87.019o
reattachment 
T87.02 Complication of below wrist T87.020o T87.021o T87.028o T87.029o
reattachment 
T87.09 Complication of upper extremity T87.091o T87.098o T87.099o
T87.090o 
reattachment, level (of attachment) unspecified 
T87.1
Complications of reattached (part of) lower extremity
T87.1 Complications of reattached (part Rejection Infection Other Unspecified
of) lower extremity complication complication
T87.10 Complications of above knee T87.100o T87.101o T87.108o T87.109o
reattachment 
T87.11 Complication of below knee T87.110o T87.111o T87.118o T87.119o
reattachment 
T87.12 Complication of below ankle T87.120o T87.121o T87.128o T87.129o
reattachment 
T87.19 Complication of lower extremity T87.191o T87.198o T87.199o
T87.190o 
reattachment, level (of attachment) unspecified 
T87.2 Complications of other reattached body part
     Includes:
    Complications of reattached ear, nose, penis
T87.200o Rejection of other reattached body part
T87.201o Infection of other reattached body part
T87.208o Other complication of other reattached body part
T87.209o Unspecified complication of other reattached body part
T87.3 Neuroma of amputation stump
T87.30o Neuroma of interscapulothoracic (forequarter) amputation stump
T87.31o Neuroma of above elbow amputation stump
T87.32o Neuroma of below elbow amputation stump
T87.35o Neuroma of transpelvic (hindquarter) amputation stump
T87.36o Neuroma of above knee amputation stump
T87.37o Neuroma of below knee amputation stump
T87.38o Neuroma of other amputation stump
T87.39o Neuroma of unspecified amputation stump
T87.4 Infection of amputation stump
T87.40o Infection of interscapulothoracic (forequarter) amputation stump
T87.41o Infection of above elbow amputation stump
T87.42o Infection of below elbow amputation stump
T87.45o Infection of transpelvic (hindquarter) amputation stump
T87.46o Infection of above knee amputation stump
879
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T87.47o 
T87.47o
Infection of below knee amputation stump
T87.48o Infection of other amputation stump
T87.49o Infection of unspecified amputation stump
T87.5 Necrosis of amputation stump
T87.50o Necrosis of interscapulothoracic (forequarter) amputation stump
T87.51o Necrosis of above elbow amputation stump
T87.52o Necrosis of below elbow amputation stump
T87.55o Necrosis of transpelvic (hindquarter) amputation stump
T87.56o Necrosis of above knee amputation stump
T87.57o Necrosis of below knee amputation stump
T87.58o Necrosis of other amputation stump
T87.59o Necrosis of unspecified amputation stump
T87.6 Other and unspecified complications of amputation stump
     Includes:
    Amputation stump:
   •
    contracture (flexion)(of next proximal joint)
   •
    haematoma
   •
    oedema
   Excludes:
  phantom limb syndrome (G54.6-G54.7)
T87.60o Other and unspecified complications of interscapulothoracic (forequarter) amputation stump
T87.61o Other and unspecified complications of above elbow amputation stump
T87.62o Other and unspecified complications of below elbow amputation stump
T87.65o Other and unspecified complications of transpelvic (hindquarter) amputation stump
T87.66o Other and unspecified complications of above knee amputation stump
T87.67o Other and unspecified complications of below knee amputation stump
T87.68o Other and unspecified complications of other amputation stump
T87.69o Other and unspecified complications of unspecified amputation stump
T88
Other complications of surgical and medical care, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
880
accidental puncture or laceration during a procedure (T81.2)
complications following:
•
infusion, transfusion and therapeutic injection (T80.-)
•
procedure NEC (T81.-)
specified complications classified elsewhere, such as:
•
complications of:
•
anaesthesia in:
•
labour and delivery (O74.-)
•
pregnancy (O29.-)
•
puerperium (O89.-)
•
devices, implants and grafts (T82-T85)
•
obstetric surgery and procedures (O75.4)
•
dermatitis due to drugs and medicaments (L23.3)(L24.4)(L25.1)(L27.0-L27.1)
•
poisoning and toxic effects of drugs and chemicals (T36-T65)
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T88.0
Infection following immunization
Includes:
Sepsis
T88.9
following immunization
T88.1 Other complications following immunization, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Rash following immunization
   Excludes:
  anaphylactic shock due to serum (T80.5)
 other serum reactions (T80.6)
postimmunization:
•
 arthropathy (M02.2)
•
 encephalitis (G04.0)
T88.2 Shock due to anaesthesia
     Includes:
    Shock due to anaesthesia in which the correct substance was properly administered
   Excludes:
  complications of anaesthesia (in):
 •
  from overdose or wrong substance given (T36-T50)
 •
  labour and delivery (O74.-)
 •
  pregnancy (O29.-)
 •
  puerperium (O89.-)
 postoperative shock NOS (T81.1)
T88.3 Malignant hyperthermia due to anaesthesia
T88.4 Failed or difficult intubation
T88.5 Other complications of anaesthesia
     Includes:
    Hypothermia following anaesthesia
T88.6 Anaphylactic shock due to adverse effect of correct drug or medicament properly
     administered
    Excludes:
   anaphylactic shock due to serum (T80.5)
T88.7 Unspecified adverse effect of drug or medicament
     Includes:
    Adverse effect of
   Allergic reaction to
  correct drug or medicament properly administered
 Hypersensitivity to
Idiosyncracy to
Excludes:
Drug:
•
hypersensitivity NOS
•
reaction NOS
specified adverse effects of drugs and medicaments (A00-R99)(T80-T88.6)(T88.8)
T88.8 Other specified complications of surgical and medical care, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Paraffinoma
T88.9 Complication of surgical and medical care, unspecified
     Excludes:
    adverse effect NOS (T78.9)
881
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T90
Sequelae of injuries, of poisoning and of other consequences of
external causes
(T90-T98)
Note:
T90
Categories (T90-T98) are to be used to indicate conditions in (S00-S99) and (T00-T88) as the cause of late
effects, which are themselves classified elsewhere. The "sequelae" include those specified as such, or as late
effects, and those present one year or more after the acute injury.
Not to be used for chronic poisoning and harmful exposure. Code these to current posioning and harmful
exposure.
Sequelae of injuries of head
T90.0 Sequelae of superficial injury of head
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classified to (S00.-)
T90.1 Sequelae of open wound of head
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S01.-)
T90.2 Sequelae of fracture of skull and facial bones
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S02.-)
T90.3 Sequelae of injury of cranial nerves
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S04.-)
T90.4 Sequelae of injury of eye and orbit
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S05.-)
T90.5 Sequelae of intracranial injury
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S06.-)
T90.8 Sequelae of other specified injuries of head
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S03.-), (S07-S08) and (S09.0-S09.8)
T90.9 Sequelae of unspecified injury of head
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S09.9)
T91 Sequelae of injuries of neck and trunk
T91.0 Sequelae of superficial injury and open wound of neck and trunk
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S10-S11), (S20-S21), (S30-S31) and (T09.0-T09.1)
T91.1 Sequelae of fracture of spine
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S12.-), (S22.0-S22.1), (S32.0-), (S32.7) and (T08)
T91.2 Sequelae of other fracture of thorax and pelvis
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S22.2-S22.9), (S32.1-S32.5) and (S32.8)
T91.3 Sequelae of injury of spinal cord
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S14.0-S14.1), (S24.0-S24.1), (S34.0-S34.1)
T91.4 Sequelae of injury of intrathoracic organs
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S26-S27)
T91.5 Sequelae of injury of intra-abdominal and pelvic organs
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S36-S37)
T91.8 Sequelae of other specified injuries of neck and trunk
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S13.-), (S14.2-S14.6), (S15-S18), (S19.7-S19.8), (S23.-S23),
   (S24.2-S24.6), (S25.-), (S28.-), (S29.0-S29.8), (S33.-), (S34.2-S34.8), (S35.-), (S38.-), (S39.0-
  S39.8), (T09.2) and (T09.4-T09.8)
T91.9 Sequelae of unspecified injury of neck and trunk
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S19.9), (S29.9), (S39.9) and (T09.9)
882
INJURY, POISONING AND CERTAIN OTHER CONSEQUENCES OF EXTERNAL CAUSES (S00-T98)
T92
Sequelae of injuries of upper limb
T92.0 T92.1 Sequelae of fracture of arm
           Includes:
          Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S42.-), (S52.-) and (T10)
T92.2 Sequelae of fracture at wrist and hand level
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S62.-)
T92.3 Sequelae of dislocation, sprain and strain of upper limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S43.-), (S53.-), (S63.-) and (T11.2)
T92.4 Sequelae of injury of nerve of upper limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S44.-), (S54.-), (S64.-) and (T11.3)
T92.5 Sequelae of injury of muscle and tendon of upper limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S46.-), (S56.-), (S66.-) and (T11.5)
T92.6 Sequelae of crushing injury and traumatic amputation of upper limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S47-S48), (S57-S58), (S67-S68) and (T11.6)
T92.8 Sequelae of other specified injuries of upper limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S40.), (S45.-), (S49.7-S49.8), (S50.-),(S55.-), (S59.7-S59.8),
   (S60.-), (S65.-), (S69.7-S69.8), (T11.0),(T11.4) and (T11.8)
T92.9 
T94.1
Sequelae of open wound of upper limb
Includes:
Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S41.-), (S51.-), (S61.-) and (T11.1)
Sequelae of unspecified injury of upper limb
Includes:
Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S49.9), (S59.9), (S69.9) and (T11.9)
T93
Sequelae of injuries of lower limb
T93.0 Sequelae of open wound of lower limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S71.-), (S81.-), (S91.-) and (T13.1)
T93.1 Sequelae of fracture of femur
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S72.-)
T93.2 Sequelae of other fractures of lower limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S82.-), (S92.-) and (T12)
T93.3 Sequelae of dislocation, sprain and strain of lower limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S73.-), (S83.-) and (S93.-) (T13.2)
T93.4 Sequelae of injury of nerve of lower limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S74.-), (S84.-) and (S94.-) (T13.3)
T93.5 Sequelae of injury of muscle and tendon of lower limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S76.-), (S86.-) and (S96.-) (T13.5)
T93.6 Sequelae of crushing injury and traumatic amputation of lower limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S77-S78), (S87-S88) and (S97-S98) (T13.6)
T93.8 Sequelae of other specified injuries of lower limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S70.-), (S75.-), (S79.7-S7.98), (S80.0-), (S85.-), (S89.7-
   S89.8), (S90.-), (S95.-), (S99.7-S99.8), (T13.0), (T13.4) and (T13.8)
T93.9 Sequelae of unspecified injury of lower limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (S79.9), (S89.9), (S99.9) and (T13.9)
T94
Sequelae of injuries involving multiple and unspecified body regions
T94.0 Sequelae of injuries involving multiple body regions
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (T00-T07)
T94.1 Sequelae of injuries, not specified by body region
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (T14.-)
883
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
T95
T95
Sequelae of burns, corrosions and frostbite
T95.0 Sequelae of burn, corrosion and frostbite of head and neck
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (T20.-), (T33.0-T33.1), (T34.0-T34.1) and (T35.2)
T95.1 Sequelae of burn, corrosion and frostbite of trunk
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (T21.-), (T33.2-T33.3), (T34.2-T34.3) and (T35.3)
T95.2 Sequelae of burn, corrosion and frostbite of upper limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (T22-T23), (T33.4-T33.5), (T34.4-T34.5) and (T35.4)
T95.3 Sequelae of burn, corrosion and frostbite of lower limb
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (T24-T25), (T33.6-T33.8), (T34.6-T34.8) and (T35.5)
T95.4 Sequelae of burn and corrosion classifiable only according to extent of body surface involved
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (T31-T32)
T95.8 Sequelae of other specified burn, corrosion and frostbite
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable T26-T29
T95.9 Sequelae of unspecified burn, corrosion and frostbite
     Includes:
    Sequelae of injury classifiable to (T30.-), (T33.9-), (T34.9) and (T35.7)
T96
Sequelae of poisoning by drugs, medicaments and biological substances
Includes:
Sequelae of poisoning classifiable to (T36-T50)
T96.0o Sequelae of accidental (unintentional) poisoning by drugs, medicaments and biological
      substances
T96.1o Sequelae of intentional self poisoning by drugs, medicaments and biological substances
T96.2o Sequelae of assault poisoning by drugs, medicaments and biological substances
T96.9o Sequelae of poisoning of undetermined intent by drugs, medicaments and biological
      substances
T97
Sequelae of toxic effects of substances chiefly nonmedicinal as to source
Includes:
Sequelae of toxic effects classifiable to (T51-T65)
T97.0o Sequelae of accident with toxic effects of substances chiefly nonmedicinal
T97.1o Sequelae of intentional self-harm with toxic effect of substances chiefly nonmedicinal
T97.2o Sequelae of assault with toxic effects of substances chiefly nonmedicinal
T97.9o Sequelae of undetermined intent with toxic effects of substances chiefly nonmedicinal
T98
Sequelae of other and unspecified effects of external causes
T98.0 Sequelae of effects of foreign body entering through natural orifice
     Includes:
    Sequelae of effects classifiable to (T15-T19)
T98.1 Sequelae of other and unspecified effects of external causes
     Includes:
    Sequelae of effects classifiable to (T66-T78)
T98.2 Sequelae of certain early complications of trauma
     Includes:
    Sequelae of complications classifiable to (T79.-)
T98.3 Sequelae of complications of surgical and medical care, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Sequelae of complications classifiable to (T80-T88)
884
I
CHAPTER XX
External causes of morbidity and mortality
(V01-Y98)
Note:
This chapter, which in previous revisions of ICD constituted a supplementary classification, permits the
classification of environmental events and circumstances as the cause of injury, poisoning and other adverse
effects. Where a code from this section is applicable, it is intended that it shall be used in addition to a code
from another chapter of the Classification indicating the nature of the condition. Most often, the condition will
be classifiable to Chapter XIX, Injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-T98).
Causes of death should preferably be tabulated according to both Chapter XIX and Chapter XX, but if only one
code is tabulated then the code from Chapter XX should be used in preference. Other conditions that may be
stated to be due to external causes are classified in Chapters I to XVIII. For these conditions, codes from Chapter
XX should be used to provide additional information for multiple-condition analysis only.
This chapter contains the following blocks:
V01-V09
V01-V99
V01-X59
V10-V19
V20-V29
V30-V39
V40-V49
V50-V59
V60-V69
V70-V79
V80-V89
V90-V94
V95-V97
V98-V99
W00-W19
W00-X59
W20-W49
W50-W64
W65-W74
W75-W84
W85-W99
X00-X09
X10-X19
X20-X29
X30-X39
X40-X49
X50-X57
X58-X59
X60-X84
X85-Y09
Y10-Y34
Y35-Y36
Y40-Y59
Y40-Y84
Y60-Y69
Y70-Y82
Y83-Y84
Y85-Y89
Y90-Y98
Pedestrian injured in transport accident
Transport accidents
Accidents
Pedal cyclist injured in transport accident
Motorcycle rider injured in transport accident
Occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in transport accident
Car occupant injured in transport accident
Occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in transport accident
Occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in transport accident
Bus occupant injured in transport accident
Other land transport accidents
Water transport accidents
Air and space transport accidents
Other and unspecified transport accidents
Falls
Other external causes of accidental injury
Exposure to inanimate mechanical forces
Exposure to animate mechanical forces
Accidental drowning and submersion
Other accidental threats to breathing
Exposure to electric current, radiation and extreme ambient air temperature and pressure
Exposure to smoke, fire and flames
Contact with heat and hot substances
Contact with venomous animals and plants
Exposure to forces of nature
Accidental poisoning by and exposure to noxious substances
Overexertion, travel and privation
Accidental exposure to other and unspecified factors
Intentional self-harm
Assault
Event of undetermined intent
Legal intervention and operations of war
Drugs, medicaments and biological substances causing adverse effects in therapeutic use
Complications of medical and surgical care
Misadventures to patients during surgical and medical care
Medical devices associated with adverse incidents in diagnostic and therapeutic use
Surgical and other medical procedures as the cause of abnormal reaction of the patient, or
of later complication, without mention of misadventure at the time of the procedure
Sequelae of external causes of morbidity and mortality
Supplementary factors related to causes of morbidity and mortality classified elsewhere
885
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Accidents
(V01-X59)
Transport accidents
(V01-V99)
Note:
This section is structured in 12 groups. Those relating to land transport accidents (V01-V89) reflect the victim's
mode of transport and are subdivided to identify the victim's "counterpart" or the type of event. The vehicle of
which the injured person is an occupant is identified in the first two characters since it is seen as the most
important factor to identify for prevention purposes.
Definitions related to transport accidents:
(a) A transport accident (V01-V99) is any accident involving a device designed primarily for, or being used at the
time primarily for, conveying persons or goods from one place to another.
(b) A public highway [trafficway] or street is the entire width between property lines (or other boundary lines) of
land open to the public as a matter of right or custom for purposes of moving persons or property from one place
to another. A roadway is that part of the public highway designed, improved and customarily used for vehicular
traffic.
(c) A traffic accident is any vehicle accident occurring on the public highway [i.e. originating on, terminating on,
or involving a vehicle partially on the highway]. A vehicle accident is assumed to have occurred on the public
highway unless another place is specified, except in the case of accidents involving only off-road motor
vehicles, which are classified as nontraffic accidents unless the contrary is stated.
(d) A nontraffic accident is any vehicle accident that occurs entirely in any place other than a public highway.
(e) A pedestrian is any person involved in an accident who was not at the time of the accident riding in or on a
motor vehicle, railway train, streetcar or animal-drawn or other vehicle, or on a pedal cycle or animal.
Includes:
(f)
person:
• changing wheel of vehicle
• making adjustment to motor of vehicle
• on foot
user of a pedestrian conveyance such as:
• baby carriage
• ice-skates
• perambulator
• push-cart
• push-chair
• roller-skates
• scooter
• skateboard
• skis
• sled
• wheelchair (powered)
A driver is an occupant of a transport vehicle who is operating or intending to operate it.
(g) A passenger is an occupant of a transport vehicle other than the driver.
Excludes: person travelling on outside of vehicle - see definition (h)
(h) A person on outside of vehicle is any person being transported by a vehicle but not occupying the space
normally reserved for the driver or passengers, or the space intended for the transport of property.
Includes:
886
person (travelling on):
• baby carriage
• bodywork
• bumper [fender]
• hanging on outside
• roof (rack)
• running-board
• step
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
(i)
A pedal cycle is any land transport vehicle operated solely by pedals.
Includes:
• bicycle
• tricycle
Excludes:
• motorized bicycle - see definition (k)
(j)
A pedal cyclist is any person riding on a pedal cycle or in a sidecar or trailer attached to such a vehicle.
(k) A motorcycle is a two-wheeled motor vehicle with one or two riding saddles and sometimes with a third wheel
for the support of a sidecar. The sidecar is considered part of the motorcycle.
Includes:
•
•
•
•
•
moped
motor scooter
motorcycle (combination) (with sidecar) (NOS)
motorized bicycle
speed-limited motor-driven cycle
Excludes:
• motor-driven tricycle - see definition (m)
(l)
A motorcycle rider is any person riding on a motorcycle or in a sidecar or trailer attached to such a vehicle.
(m) A three-wheeled motor vehicle is a motorized tricycle designed primarily for on-road use.
Includes:
• motor-driven tricycle
• motorized rickshaw
• three-wheeled motor car
Excludes:
• all-terrain vehicle - see definition (x)
• motorcycle with sidecar - see definition (k)
(n) A car [automobile] is a four-wheeled motor vehicle designed primarily for carrying up to 10 persons. A trailer
or caravan being towed by a car is considered a part of the car.
Includes:
• minibus
(o) A motor vehicle or vehicle may refer to various transport vehicles. The local usage of the terms should be
established to determine the appropriate code. If the terms are used ambiguously, use the code for "unspecified".
A trailer or caravan being towed by a car is considered a part of the car.
(p) A pick-up truck or van is a four - or six- wheeled motor vehicle designed primarily for carrying property,
weighing less than the local limit for classification as a heavy goods vehicle, and not requiring a special driver's
licence.
(q) A heavy transport vehicle is a motor vehicle designed primarily for carrying property, meeting local criteria for
classification as a heavy goods vehicle in terms of kerbside weight (usually above 3500 kg), and requiring a
special driver's licence.
(r)
A bus is a motor vehicle designed or adapted primarily for carrying more than 10 persons, and requiring a
special driver's licence.
Includes:
• coach
887
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
(s) A railway train or railway vehicle is any device, with or without cars coupled to it, designed for traffic on a
railway.
Includes:
interurban (operated chiefly on its own right-of-way, not open to other traffic):
• electric car
• streetcar
railway train, any power [diesel] [electric] [steam]:
• funicular
• monorail or two-rail
• subterranean or elevated
other vehicle designed to run on a railway track
Excludes:
• interurban electric cars [streetcars] specified to be operating on a right-of-way that forms part of
the public street or highway - see definition (s)
(t)
A streetcar is a device designed and used primarily for transporting persons within a municipality, running on
rails, usually subject to normal traffic control signals, and operated principally on a right-of-way that forms part
of the roadway. A trailer being towed by a streetcar is considered a part of the streetcar.
Includes:
interurban electric car or streetcar, when specified to be operating on a street or public highway:
• tram (car)
• trolley (car)
(u) A special vehicle mainly used on industrial premises is a motor vehicle designed primarily for use within the
buildings and premises of industrial or commerical establishments.
Includes:
battery-powered:
• airport passenger vehicle
• coal-car in mine
• forklift (truck)
• logging car
• self-propelled truck, industrial
• station baggage truck (powered)
• tram, truck or tub (powered) in mine or quarry
• truck (baggage) (mail)
(v) A special vehicle mainly used in agriculture is a motor vehicle designed specifically for use in farming and
agriculture (horticulture), for example to work the land, tend and harvest crops and transport materials on the
farm.
Includes:
combine harvester:
• self-propelled farm machinery
• tractor (and trailer)
(w) A special construction vehicle is a motor vehicle designed specifically for use in the construction (and
demolition) of roads, buildings and other structures.
Includes:
•
•
•
•
•
•
bulldozer
digger
dumper truck
earth-leveller
mechanical shovel
road-roller
(x) A special all-terrain vehicle is a motor vehicle of special design to enable it to negotiate rough or soft terrain or
snow. Examples of special design are high construction, special wheels and tyres, tracks, and support on a
cushion of air.
Includes:
• hovercraft on land or swamp
• snowmobile
Excludes: hovercraft on an open water - see definition (y)
(y) A watercraft is any device for transporting passengers or goods on water.
Includes:
hovercraft NOS
(z) An aircraft is any device for transporting passengers or goods in the air.
888
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Classification and coding instructions for transport accidents:
1.
If an event is unspecified as to whether it was a traffic or nontraffic accident, it is assumed to be:
(a) A traffic accident when the event is classifiable to categories V10-V82 and V87.
(b) A nontraffic accident when the event is classifiable to categories V83-V86.
For these categories the victim is either a pedestrian, or an occupant of a vehicle designed primarily for off-road
use.
2. When accidents involving more than one kind of transport are reported, the following order of precedence
  should be used:
 •
  aircraft and spacecraft (V95-V97)
 •
  other modes of transport (V01-V89, V98-V99)
 •
  watercraft (V90-V94)
3. Where transport accident descriptions do not specify the victim as being a vehicle occupant and the victim is
  described as:
crushed
dragged
hit
injured
killed
knocked down
run over
by any vehicle including
animal being ridden
animal-drawn vehicle
bicycle
bulldozer
bus
car
motorcycle
motorized tricycle
pick-up (truck)
recreational vehicle
streetcar
tractor
train
tram
truck
van
classify the victim as a pedestrian (categories V01-V09).
4.
Where transport accident descriptions do not indicate the victim's role, such as:
airplane
bicycle
boat
bulldozer
bus
car
motorcycle
motorized tricycle
pick-up (truck)
recreational vehicle
spacecraft
streetcar
tractor
train
tram
truck
van
watercraft
accident
collision
crash
wreck
NOS
classify the victim as an occupant or rider of the vehicle mentioned.
If more than one vehicle is mentioned, do not make any assumption as to which vehicle was occupied by the
victim unless the vehicles are the same. Instead, code to the appropriate categories V87-V88, V90-V94, V95-
V97, taking into account the order of precedence given in note 2 above.
889
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
5.
Where a transport accident, such as vehicle (motor) (nonmotor):
•
failing to make curve
•
going out of control (due to):
•
burst tyre [blowout]
•
driver falling asleep
•
driver inattention
•
excessive speed
•
failure of mechanical part
resulted in a subsequent collision, classify the accident as a collision. If an accident other than a collision
resulted, classify it as a noncollision accident according to the vehicle type involved.
6. Where a transport accident involving a vehicle in motion, such as:
  accidental poisoning from exhaust gas generated by
 breakage of any part of
explosion of any part of
fall, jump or being accidentally pushed from
fire starting in
vehicle in motion
hit by object thrown into or onto
injured by being thrown against some part of, or object in
injury from moving part of
object falling in or on
resulted in a subsequent collision, classify the accident as a collision. If an accident other than a collision
resulted, classify it as a noncollision accident according to the vehicle type involved.
7. Land transport accidents described as a collision (due to loss of control) (on highway) between vehicle and:
abutment (bridge) (overpass)
fallen stone
guard rail or boundary fence
inter-highway divider
landslide (not moving)
object thrown in front of motor vehicle
other object, fixed, movable or moving
safety island
traffic sign or maker (temporary)
tree
utility pole
wall of cut made for road
are included in V17.-, V27.-, V37.-, V47.-, V57.-, V67.- and V77.-
overturning (without collision) are included in V18.-, V28.-, V38.-, V48.-, V58.-, V68.-, and V78.-
collision with animal (herded) (unattended) are included in V10.-, V20.-, V30.-, V40.-, V50.-, V60.- and V70.-
collision with animal-drawn vehicle or animal being ridden are included in V16.-, V26.-, V36.-, V46.-, V56.-,
V66.- and V76.-
Excludes:
890
accidents involving vehicles, but unrelated to the hazards associated with the means of transportation [e.g.
injuries received in a fight on board ship; transport vehicle involved in a cataclysm; finger crushed when
shutting car door] (W00-X59)
accidents to persons engaged in the maintenance or repair of transport equipment or vehicle not in motion unless
injured by another vehicle in motion(W00-X59)
assault by crashing of motor vehicle (Y03-)
event of undetermined intent (Y31-Y33)
intentional self-harm (X81-X83)
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Pedestrian injured in transport accident
(V01-V09)
Excludes:
V01
V09.2
collision of pedestrian (conveyance) with other pedestrian (conveyance) (W51.-)
with subsequent fall (W03.-)
Pedestrian injured in collision with pedal cycle
V01.0 Pedestrian injured in collision with pedal cycle, nontraffic accident
V01.1 Pedestrian injured in collision with pedal cycle, traffic accident
V01.9 Pedestrian injured in collision with pedal cycle, unspecified whether traffic or nontraffic
     accident
V02
Pedestrian injured in collision with two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle
V02.0 Pedestrian injured in collision with two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle, nontraffic accident
V02.1 Pedestrian injured in collision with two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle, traffic accident
V02.9 Pedestrian injured in collision with two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle, unspecified whether
     traffic or nontraffic accident
V03
Pedestrian injured in collision with car, pick-up truck or van
V03.0 Pedestrian injured in collision with car, pick-up truck or van, nontraffic accident
V03.1 Pedestrian injured in collision with car, pick-up truck or van, traffic accident
V03.9 Pedestrian injured in collision with car, pick-up truck or van, unspecified whether traffic or
     nontraffic accident
V04
Pedestrian injured in collision with heavy transport vehicle or bus
V04.0 Pedestrian injured in collision with heavy transport vehicle or bus, nontraffic accident
V04.1 Pedestrian injured in collision with heavy transport vehicle or bus, traffic accident
V04.9 Pedestrian injured in collision with heavy transport vehicle or bus, unspecified whether traffic
     or nontraffic accident
V05
Pedestrian injured in collision with railway train or railway vehicle
V05.0 Pedestrian injured in collision with railway train or railway vehicle, nontraffic accident
V05.1 Pedestrian injured in collision with railway train or railway vehicle, traffic accident
V05.9 Pedestrian injured in collision with railway train or railway vehicle, unspecified whether traffic
     or nontraffic accident
V06
Pedestrian injured in collision with other nonmotor vehicle
Includes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle, animal being ridden, streetcar
V06.0 Pedestrian injured in collision with other nonmotor vehicle, nontraffic accident
V06.1 Pedestrian injured in collision with other nonmotor vehicle, traffic accident
V06.9 Pedestrian injured in collision with other nonmotor vehicle, unspecified whether traffic or
     nontraffic accident
V09
Pedestrian injured in other and unspecified transport accidents
Includes:
pedestrian injured by special vehicle
V09.0 Pedestrian injured in nontraffic accident involving other and unspecified motor vehicles
V09.1 Pedestrian injured in unspecified nontraffic accident
V09.2 Pedestrian injured in traffic accident involving other and unspecified motor vehicles
891
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V09.3 
V09.3
Pedestrian injured in unspecified traffic accident
V09.9 Pedestrian injured in unspecified transport accident
Pedal cyclist injured in transport accident (V10-V19)
V10
Pedal cyclist injured in collision with pedestrian or animal
Excludes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle or animal being ridden (V16.-)
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pedal cycle V10.0 V10.4
V10.3
Passenger on pedal cycle V10.1 V10.5
V10.3
Unspecified pedal cyclist V10.2 V10.9
V10.3
V11
Pedal cyclist injured in collision with other pedal cycle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pedal cycle V11.0 V11.4
V11.3
Passenger on pedal cycle V11.1 V11.5
V11.3
Unspecified pedal cyclist V11.2 V11.9
V11.3
V12
Pedal cyclist injured in collision with two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pedal cycle V12.0 V12.4
V12.3
Passenger on pedal cycle V12.1 V12.5
V12.3
Unspecified pedal cyclist V12.2 V12.9
V12.3
V13
Pedal cyclist injured in collision with car, pick-up truck or van
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pedal cycle V13.0 V13.4
V13.3
Passenger on pedal cycle V13.1 V13.5
V13.3
Unspecified pedal cyclist V13.2 V13.9
V13.3
V14
Pedal cyclist injured in collision with heavy transport vehicle or bus
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pedal cycle V14.0 V14.4
V14.3
Passenger on pedal cycle V14.1 V14.5
V14.3
Unspecified pedal cyclist V14.2 V14.9
V14.3
892
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
V15
Pedal cyclist injured in collision with railway train or railway vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Driver of pedal cycle V15.0 V15.4
               accident 
V15.3
Passenger on pedal cycle V15.1 V15.5
V15.3
Unspecified pedal cyclist V15.2 V15.9
V19.4
Traffic accident While boarding
or alighting
V15.3
V16
Pedal cyclist injured in collision with other nonmotor vehicle
Includes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle, animal being ridden, streetcar
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pedal cycle V16.0 V16.4
V16.3
Passenger on pedal cycle V16.1 V16.5
V16.3
Unspecified pedal cyclist V16.2 V16.9
V16.3
V17
Pedal cyclist injured in collision with fixed or stationary object
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pedal cycle V17.0 V17.4
V17.3
Passenger on pedal cycle V17.1 V17.5
V17.3
Unspecified pedal cyclist V17.2 V17.9
V17.3
V18
Pedal cyclist injured in noncollision transport accident
Includes:
fall or thrown from pedal cycle (without antecedent collision)
overturning:
•
NOS
•
without collision
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pedal cycle V18.0 V18.4
V18.3
Passenger on pedal cycle V18.1 V18.5
V18.3
Unspecified pedal cyclist V18.2 V18.9
V18.3
V19
Pedal cyclist injured in other and unspecified transport accidents
V19.0 Driver of pedal cycle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     nontraffic accident
V19.1 Passenger of pedal cycle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     nontraffic accident
V19.2 Unspecified pedal cyclist injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     nontraffic accident
    Includes:
   Pedal cycle collision NOS, nontraffic
V19.3 Pedal cyclist [any] injured in unspecified nontraffic accident
     Includes:
    Pedal cycle accident NOS, nontraffic
   Pedal cyclist injured in nontraffic accident NOS
V19.4 Driver of pedal cycle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in traffic
     accident
893
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V19.5 
V19.5
Passenger of pedal cycle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
traffic accident
V19.6 Unspecified pedal cyclist injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     traffic accident
    Includes:
   Pedal cycle collision NOS (traffic)
V19.8 Pedal cyclist [any] injured in other specified transport accident
     Includes:
    Trapped by part of pedal cycle
V19.9 Pedal cyclist [any] injured in unspecified traffic accident
     Includes:
    Pedal cycle accident NOS
Motorcycle rider injured in transport accident
(V20-V29)
Includes:
Excludes:
V20
moped
motor scooter
motorcycle with sidecar
motorized bicycle
three-wheeled motor vehicle (V30-V39)
Motorcycle rider injured in collision with pedestrian or animal
Excludes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle or animal being ridden (V26.-)
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of motorcycle V20.0 V20.4
V20.3
Passenger on motorcycle V20.1 V20.5
V20.3
Unspecified motorcycle rider V20.2 V20.9
V20.3
V21
Motorcycle rider injured in collision with pedal cycle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of motorcycle V21.0 V21.4
V21.3
Passenger on motorcycle V21.1 V21.5
V21.3
Unspecified motorcycle rider V21.2 V21.9
V21.3
V22
Motorcycle rider injured in collision with two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of motorcycle V22.0 V22.4
V22.3
Passenger on motorcycle V22.1 V22.5
V22.3
Unspecified motorcycle rider V22.2 V22.9
V22.3
V23
Motorcycle rider injured in collision with car, pick-up truck or van
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of motorcycle V23.0 V23.4
V23.3
Passenger on motorcycle V23.1 V23.5
V23.3
Unspecified motorcycle rider V23.2 V23.9
V23.3
894
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
V24
Motorcycle rider injured in collision with heavy transport vehicle or bus
Injured person Nontraffic Driver of motorcycle V24.0 V24.4
               accident 
V24.3
Passenger on motorcycle V24.1 V24.5
V24.3
Unspecified motorcycle rider V24.2 V24.9
V29.1
Traffic accident While boarding
or alighting
V24.3
V25
Motorcycle rider injured in collision with railway train or railway vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of motorcycle V25.0 V25.4
V25.3
Passenger on motorcycle V25.1 V25.5
V25.3
Unspecified motorcycle rider V25.2 V25.9
V25.3
V26
Motorcycle rider injured in collision with other nonmotor vehicle
Includes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle, animal being ridden, streetcar
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of motorcycle V26.0 V26.4
V26.3
Passenger on motorcycle V26.1 V26.5
V26.3
Unspecified motorcycle rider V26.2 V26.9
V26.3
V27
Motorcycle rider injured in collision with fixed or stationary object
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of motorcycle V27.0 V27.4
V27.3
Passenger on motorcycle V27.1 V27.5
V27.3
Unspecified motorcycle rider V27.2 V27.9
V27.3
V28
Motorcycle rider injured in noncollision transport accident
Includes:
fall or thrown from motorcycle (without antecedent collision)
overturning:
•
NOS
•
without collision
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of motorcycle V28.0 V28.4
V28.3
Passenger on motorcycle V28.1 V28.5
V28.3
Unspecified motorcycle rider V28.2 V28.9
V28.3
V29
Motorcycle rider injured in other and unspecified transport accidents
V29.0 Driver of motorcycle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     nontraffic accident
V29.1 Passenger of motorcycle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     nontraffic accident
895
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V29.2 Unspecified motorcycle rider injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     nontraffic accident
    Includes:
   Motorcycle collision NOS, nontraffic
V29.3 Motorcycle rider [any] injured in unspecified nontraffic accident
     Includes:
    Motorcycle accident NOS, nontraffic
   Motorcycle rider injured in nontraffic accident NOS
V29.4 Driver of motorcycle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in traffic
     accident
V29.5 Passenger of motorcycle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     traffic accident
V29.6 Unspecified motorcycle rider injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     traffic accident
    Includes:
   Motorcycle collision NOS (traffic)
V29.8 Motorcycle rider [any] injured in other specified transport accidents
     Includes:
    Trapped by part of motorcycle
V29.9 Motorcycle rider [any] injured in unspecified traffic accident
     Includes:
    Motorcycle accident NOS
V29.2
Occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in transport accident
(V30-V39)
Includes:
Excludes:
V30
motorized tricycle
motorcycle with sidecar (V20-V29)
vehicle designed primarily for off-road use (V86.-)
Occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with pedestrian
or animal
Excludes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle or animal being ridden (V36.-)
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of vehicle V30.0 V30.5
V30.4
Passenger in vehicle V30.1 V30.6
V30.4
Person on outside of vehicle V30.2 V30.7
V30.4
Unspecified occupant of vehicle V30.3 V30.9
V30.4
V31
Occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with pedal cycle
Injured person
Nontraffic
accident
Traffic accident While boarding
or alighting
Driver of vehicle V31.0 V31.5 V31.4
Passenger in vehicle V31.1 V31.6 V31.4
Person on outside of vehicle V31.2 V31.7 V31.4
Unspecified occupant of vehicle V31.3 V31.9 V31.4
896
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
V32
Occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with two- or
three-wheeled motor vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of vehicle V32.0 V32.5
V32.4
Passenger in vehicle V32.1 V32.6
V32.4
Person on outside of vehicle V32.2 V32.7
V32.4
Unspecified occupant of vehicle V32.3 V32.9
V36
V32.4
V33
Occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with car, pick-
up truck or van
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of vehicle V33.0 V33.5
V33.4
Passenger in vehicle V33.1 V33.6
V33.4
Person on outside of vehicle V33.2 V33.7
V33.4
Unspecified occupant of vehicle V33.3 V33.9
V33.4
V34
Occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with heavy
transport vehicle or bus
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of vehicle V34.0 V34.5
V34.4
Passenger in vehicle V34.1 V34.6
V34.4
Person on outside of vehicle V34.2 V34.7
V34.4
Unspecified occupant of vehicle V34.3 V34.9
V34.4
V35
Occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with railway
train or railway vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of vehicle V35.0 V35.5
V35.4
Passenger in vehicle V35.1 V35.6
V35.4
Person on outside of vehicle V35.2 V35.7
V35.4
Unspecified occupant of vehicle V35.3 V35.9
V35.4
V36
Occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with other
nonmotor vehicle
Includes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle, animal being ridden, streetcar
Injured person
Nontraffic
accident
Traffic accident While boarding
or alighting
Driver of vehicle V36.0 V36.5 V36.4
Passenger in vehicle V36.1 V36.6 V36.4
Person on outside of vehicle V36.2 V36.7 V36.4
Unspecified occupant of vehicle V36.3 V36.9 V36.4
897
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V37
V37
Occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with fixed or
stationary object
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of vehicle V37.0 V37.5
V37.4
Passenger in vehicle V37.1 V37.6
V37.4
Person on outside of vehicle V37.2 V37.7
V37.4
Unspecified occupant of vehicle V37.3 V37.9
V37.4
V38
Occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in noncollision transport
accident
Includes:
fall or thrown from three-wheeled motor vehicle
overturning:
•
NOS
•
without collision
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of vehicle V38.0 V38.5
V38.4
Passenger in vehicle V38.1 V38.6
V38.4
Person on outside of vehicle V38.2 V38.7
V38.4
Unspecified occupant of vehicle V38.3 V38.9
V38.4
V39
Occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in other and unspecified
transport accidents
V39.0 Driver of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor
     vehicles in nontraffic accident
V39.1 Passenger of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with other and unspecified
     motor vehicles in nontraffic accident
V39.2 Unspecified occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with other and
     unspecified motor vehicles in nontraffic accident
    Includes:
   Collision NOS involving three-wheeled motor vehicle, nontraffic
V39.3 Occupant [any] of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in unspecified nontraffic accident
     Includes:
    Accident NOS involving three-wheeled motor vehicle, nontraffic
   Occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in nontraffic accident NOS
V39.4 Driver of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor
     vehicles in traffic accident
V39.5 Passenger of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with other and unspecified
     motor vehicles in traffic accident
V39.6 Unspecified occupant of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in collision with other and
     unspecified motor vehicles in traffic accident
    Includes:
   Collision NOS involving three-wheeled motor vehicle (traffic)
V39.8 Occupant [any] of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in other specified transport accidents
     Includes:
    Trapped by door or other part of three-wheeled motor vehicle
V39.9 Occupant [any] of three-wheeled motor vehicle injured in unspecified traffic accident
     Includes:
    Accident NOS involving three-wheeled motor vehicle
898
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Car occupant injured in transport accident
(V40-V49)
Includes:
V40
V44
minibus
Car occupant injured in collision with pedestrian or animal
Excludes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle or animal being ridden (V46.-)
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of car V40.0 V40.5
V40.4
Passenger in car V40.1 V40.6
V40.4
Person on outside of vehicle V40.2 V40.7
V40.4
Unspecified occupant of car V40.3 V40.9
V40.4
V41
Car occupant injured in collision with pedal cycle
Injured Person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of car V41.0 V41.5
V41.4
Passenger in car V41.1 V41.6
V41.4
Person on outside of vehicle V41.2 V41.7
V41.4
Unspecified occupant of car V41.3 V41.9
V41.4
V42
Car occupant injured in collision with two or three-wheeled motor vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of car V42.0 V42.5
V42.4
Passenger in car V42.1 V42.6
V42.4
Person on outside of vehicle V42.2 V42.7
V42.4
Unspecified occupant of car V42.3 V42.9
V42.4
V43
Car occupant injured in collision with car, pick-up truck or van
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of car V43.0 V43.5
V43.4
Passenger in car V43.1 V43.6
V43.4
Person on outside of vehicle V43.2 V43.7
V43.4
Unspecified occupant of car V43.3 V43.9
V43.4
V44
Car occupant injured in collision with heavy transport vehicle or bus
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of car V44.0 V44.5
V44.4
Passenger in car V44.1 V44.6
V44.4
Person on outside of vehicle V44.2 V44.7
V44.4
Unspecified occupant of car V44.3 V44.9
V44.4
899
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V45
V45
Car occupant injured in collision with railway train or railway vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of car V45.0 V45.5
V45.4
Passenger in car V45.1 V45.6
V45.4
Person on outside of vehicle V45.2 V45.7
V45.4
Unspecified occupant of car V45.3 V45.9
V45.4
V46
Car occupant injured in collision with other nonmotor vehicle
Includes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle, animal being ridden, streetcar
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of car V46.0 V46.5
V46.4
Passenger in car V46.1 V46.6
V46.4
Person on outside of vehicle V46.2 V46.7
V46.4
Unspecified occupant of car V46.3 V46.9
V46.4
V47
Car occupant injured in collision with fixed or stationary object
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of car V47.0 V47.5
V47.4
Passenger in car V47.1 V47.6
V47.4
Person on outside of vehicle V47.2 V47.7
V47.4
Unspecified occupant of car V47.3 V47.9
V47.4
V48
Car occupant injured in noncollision transport accident
Includes:
overturning:
•
NOS
•
without collision
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of car V48.0 V48.5
V48.4
Passenger in car V48.1 V48.6
V48.4
Person on outside of vehicle V48.2 V48.7
V48.4
Unspecified occupant of car V48.3 V48.9
V48.4
V49
Car occupant injured in other and unspecified transport accidents
V49.0 Driver of car injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in nontraffic
     accident
V49.1 Passenger of car injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in nontraffic
     accident
V49.2 Unspecified car occupant injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     nontraffic accident
    Includes:
   Car collision NOS, nontraffic
900
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
V49.3
Car occupant [any] injured in unspecified nontraffic accident
Includes:
Car accident NOS, nontraffic
Car occupant injured in nontraffic accident NOS
V52
V49.4 Driver of car injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in traffic accident
V49.5 Passenger of car injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in traffic
     accident
V49.6 Unspecified car occupant injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     traffic accident
    Includes:
   Car collision NOS (traffic)
V49.8 Car occupant [any] injured in other specified transport accidents
     Includes:
    Trapped by door or other part of car
V49.9 Car occupant [any] injured in unspecified traffic accident
     Includes:
    Car accident NOS
Occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in transport accident
(V50-V59)
Excludes:
V50
heavy transport vehicle (V60-V69)
Occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with pedestrian or
animal
Excludes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle or animal being ridden (V56.-)
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pick-up truck or van V50.0 V50.5
V50.4
Passenger in pick-up truck or van V50.1 V50.6
V50.4
Person on outside of vehicle V50.2 V50.7 V50.4
Unspecified occupant of pick-up truck or van V50.3 V50.9 V50.4
V51
Occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with pedal cycle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pick-up truck or van V51.0 V51.5
V51.4
Passenger in pick-up truck or van V51.1 V51.6
V51.4
Person on outside of vehicle V51.2 V51.7
V51.4
Unspecified occupant of pick-up truck or van V51.3 V51.9
V51.4
V52
Occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with two- or three-
wheeled motor vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pick-up truck or van V52.0 V52.5
V52.4
Passenger in pick-up truck or van V52.1 V52.6
V52.4
Person on outside of vehicle V52.2 V52.7
V52.4
Unspecified occupant of pick-up truck or van V52.3 V52.9
V52.4
901
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V53
V53
Occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with car, pick-up truck
or van
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pick-up truck or van V53.0 V53.5
V53.4
Passenger in pick-up truck or van V53.1 V53.6
V53.4
Person on outside of vehicle V53.2 V53.7
V53.4
Unspecified occupant of pick-up truck or van V53.3 V53.9
V53.4
V54
Occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with heavy transport
vehicle or bus
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pick-up truck or van V54.0 V54.5
V54.4
Passenger in pick-up truck or van V54.1 V54.6
V54.4
Person on outside of vehicle V54.2 V54.7
V54.4
Unspecified occupant of pick-up truck or van V54.3 V54.9
V54.4
V55
Occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with railway train or
railway vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pick-up truck or van V55.0 V55.5
V55.4
Passenger in pick-up truck or van V55.1 V55.6
V55.4
Person on outside of vehicle V55.2 V55.7 V55.4
Unspecified occupant of pick-up truck or van V55.3 V55.9 V55.4
V56
Occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with other nonmotor
vehicle
Includes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle, animal being ridden, streetcar
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pick-up truck or van V56.0 V56.5
V56.4
Passenger in pick-up truck or van V56.1 V56.6
V56.4
Person on outside of vehicle V56.2 V56.7
V56.4
Unspecified occupant of pick-up truck or van V56.3 V56.9
V56.4
V57
Occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with fixed or stationary
object
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pick-up truck or van V57.0 V57.5
V57.4
Passenger in pick-up truck or van V57.1 V57.6
V57.4
Person on outside of vehicle V57.2 V57.7
V57.4
Unspecified occupant of pick-up truck or van V57.3 V57.9
V57.4
902
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
V58
Occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in noncollision transport accident
Includes:
overturning:
•
NOS
•
without collision
V60
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of pick-up truck or van V58.0 V58.5
V58.4
Passenger in pick-up truck or van V58.1 V58.6
V58.4
Person on outside of vehicle V58.2 V58.7
V58.4
Unspecified occupant of pick-up truck or van V58.3 V58.9
V58.4
V59
Occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in other and unspecified transport
accidents
V59.0 Driver of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     nontraffic accident
V59.1 Passenger of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with other and unspecified motor
     vehicles in nontraffic accident
V59.2 Unspecified occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with other and unspecified
     motor vehicles in nontraffic accident
    Includes:
   Collision NOS involving pick-up truck or van, nontraffic
V59.3 Occupant [any] of pick-up truck or van injured in unspecified nontraffic accident
     Includes:
    Accident NOS involving pick-up truck or van, nontraffic
   Occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in nontraffic accident NOS
V59.4 Driver of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     traffic accident
V59.5 Passenger of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with other and unspecified motor
     vehicles in traffic accident
V59.6 Unspecified occupant of pick-up truck or van injured in collision with other and unspecified
     motor vehicles in traffic accident
    Includes:
   Collision NOS involving pick-up truck or van (traffic)
V59.8 Occupant [any] of pick-up truck or van injured in other specified transport accidents
     Includes:
    Trapped by door or other part of pick-up truck or van
V59.9 Occupant [any] of pick-up truck or van injured in unspecified traffic accident
     Includes:
    Accident NOS involving pick-up truck or van
Occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in transport accident
(V60-V69)
V60
Occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with pedestrian or
animal
Excludes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle or animal being ridden (V66.-)
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of heavy transport vehicle V60.0 V60.5
V60.4
Passenger in heavy transport vehicle V60.1 V60.6
V60.4
Person on outside of vehicle V60.2 V60.7
V60.4
Unspecified occupant of heavy transport vehicle V60.3 V60.9
V60.4
903
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V61
V61
Occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with pedal cycle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of heavy transport vehicle V61.0 V61.5
V61.4
Passenger in heavy transport vehicle V61.1 V61.6
V61.4
Person on outside of vehicle V61.2 V61.7
V61.4
Unspecified occupant of heavy transport vehicle V61.3 V61.9
V61.4
V62
Occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with two or three-
wheeled motor vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of heavy transport vehicle V62.0 V62.5
V62.4
Passenger in heavy transport vehicle V62.1 V62.6
V62.4
Person on outside of vehicle V62.2 V62.7
V62.4
Unspecified occupant of heavy transport vehicle V62.3 V62.9
V62.4
V63
Occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with car, pick-up
truck or van
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of heavy transport vehicle V63.0 V63.5
V63.4
Passenger in heavy transport vehicle V63.1 V63.6
V63.4
Person on outside of vehicle V63.2 V63.7
V63.4
Unspecified occupant of heavy transport vehicle V63.3 V63.9
V63.4
V64
Occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with heavy transport
vehicle or bus
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of heavy transport vehicle V64.0 V64.5
V64.4
Passenger in heavy transport vehicle V64.1 V64.6
V64.4
Person on outside of vehicle V64.2 V64.7
V64.4
Unspecified occupant of heavy transport vehicle V64.3 V64.9
V64.4
V65
Occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with railway train or
railway vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of heavy transport vehicle V65.0 V65.5
V65.4
Passenger in heavy transport vehicle V65.1 V65.6
V65.4
Person on outside of vehicle V65.2 V65.7
V65.4
Unspecified occupant of heavy transport vehicle V65.3 V65.9
V65.4
904
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
V66
Occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with other nonmotor
vehicle
Includes:
V69.5
collision with animal-drawn vehicle, animal being ridden, streetcar
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of heavy transport vehicle V66.0 V66.5
V66.4
Passenger in heavy transport vehicle V66.1 V66.6
V66.4
Person on outside of vehicle V66.2 V66.7
V66.4
Unspecified occupant of heavy transport vehicle V66.3 V66.9
V66.4
V67
Occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with fixed or
stationary object
Injured person
Nontraffic
accident
Traffic accident While boarding
or alighting
Driver of heavy transport vehicle V67.0 V67.5 V67.4
Passenger in heavy transport vehicle V67.1 V67.6 V67.4
Person on outside of vehicle V67.2 V67.7 V67.4
Unspecified occupant of heavy transport vehicle V67.3 V67.9 V67.4
V68
Occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in noncollision transport
accident
Includes:
overturning:
•
NOS
•
without collision
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of heavy transport vehicle V68.0 V68.5
V68.4
Passenger in heavy transport vehicle V68.1 V68.6
V68.4
Person on outside of vehicle V68.2 V68.7
V68.4
Unspecified occupant of heavy transport vehicle V68.3 V68.9
V68.4
V69
Occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in other and unspecified
transport accidents
V69.0 Driver of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles
     in nontraffic accident
V69.1 Passenger of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor
     vehicles in nontraffic accident
V69.2 Unspecified occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with other and
     unspecified motor vehicles in nontraffic accident
    Includes:
   Collision NOS involving heavy transport vehicle, nontraffic
V69.3 Occupant [any] of heavy transport vehicle injured in unspecified nontraffic accident
     Includes:
    Accident NOS involving heavy transport vehicle, nontraffic
   Occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in nontraffic accident NOS
V69.4 Driver of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles
     in traffic accident
V69.5 Passenger of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with other and unspecified motor
     vehicles in traffic accident
905
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V69.6 Unspecified occupant of heavy transport vehicle injured in collision with other and
     unspecified motor vehicles in traffic accident
    Includes:
   Collision NOS involving heavy transport vehicle (traffic)
V69.8 Occupant [any] of heavy transport vehicle injured in other specified transport accidents
     Includes:
    Trapped by door or other part of heavy transport vehicle
V69.9 Occupant [any] of heavy transport vehicle injured in unspecified traffic accident
     Includes:
    Accident NOS involving heavy transport vehicle
V69.6
Bus occupant injured in transport accident
(V70-V79)
Excludes:
V70
minibus (V40-V49)
Bus occupant injured in collision with pedestrian or animal
Excludes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle or animal being ridden (V76.-)
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of bus V70.0 V70.5
V70.4
Passenger in bus V70.1 V70.6
V70.4
Person on outside of vehicle V70.2 V70.7
V70.4
Unspecified occupant of bus V70.3 V70.9
V70.4
V71
Bus occupant injured in collision with pedal cycle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of bus V71.0 V71.5
V71.4
Passenger in bus V71.1 V71.6
V71.4
Person on outside of vehicle V71.2 V71.7
V71.4
Unspecified occupant of bus V71.3 V71.9
V71.4
V72
Bus occupant injured in collision with two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of bus V72.0 V72.5
V72.4
Passenger in bus V72.1 V72.6
V72.4
Person on outside of vehicle V72.2 V72.7
V72.4
Unspecified occupant of bus V72.3 V72.9
V72.4
V73
Bus occupant injured in collision with car, pick-up truck or van
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of bus V73.0 V73.5
V73.4
Passenger in bus V73.1 V73.6
V73.4
Person on outside of vehicle V73.2 V73.7
V73.4
Unspecified occupant of bus V73.3 V73.9
V73.4
906
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
V74
Bus occupant injured in collision with heavy transport vehicle or bus
Injured person Nontraffic Driver of bus V74.0 V74.5
               accident 
V74.4
Passenger in bus V74.1 V74.6
V74.4
Person on outside of vehicle V74.2 V74.7
V74.4
Unspecified occupant of bus V74.3 V74.9
V78
Traffic accident While boarding
or alighting
V74.4
V75
Bus occupant injured in collision with railway train or railway vehicle
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of bus V75.0 V75.5
V75.4
Passenger in bus V75.1 V75.6
V75.4
Person on outside of vehicle V75.2 V75.7
V75.4
Unspecified occupant of bus V75.3 V75.9
V75.4
V76
Bus occupant injured in collision with other nonmotor vehicle
Includes:
collision with animal-drawn vehicle, animal being ridden, streetcar
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of bus V76.0 V76.5
V76.4
Passenger in bus V76.1 V76.6
V76.4
Person on outside of vehicle V76.2 V76.7
V76.4
Unspecified occupant of bus V76.3 V76.9
V76.4
V77
Bus occupant injured in collision with fixed or stationary object
Injured person
Nontraffic
accident
Traffic accident While boarding
or alighting
Driver of bus V77.0 V77.5 V77.4
Passenger in bus V77.1 V77.6 V77.4
Person on outside of vehicle V77.2 V77.7 V77.4
Unspecified occupant of bus V77.3 V77.9 V77.4
V78
Bus occupant injured in noncollision transport accident
Includes:
overturning:
•
NOS
•
without collision
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of bus V78.0 V78.5
V78.4
Passenger in bus V78.1 V78.6
V78.4
Person on outside of vehicle V78.2 V78.7
V78.4
Unspecified occupant of bus V78.3 V78.9
V78.4
907
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V79
V79
Bus occupant injured in other and unspecified transport accidents
V79.0 Bus driver injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in nontraffic accident
V79.1 Passenger in bus injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in nontraffic
     accident
V79.2 Unspecified bus occupant injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     nontraffic accident
    Includes:
   Bus collision NOS, nontraffic
V79.3 Bus occupant [any] injured in unspecified nontraffic accident
     Includes:
    Bus accident NOS, nontraffic
   Bus occupant injured in nontraffic accident NOS
V79.4 Bus driver injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in traffic accident
V79.5 Passenger in bus injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in traffic
     accident
V79.6 Unspecified bus occupant injured in collision with other and unspecified motor vehicles in
     traffic accident
    Includes:
   Bus collision NOS (traffic)
V79.8 Bus occupant [any] injured in other specified transport accidents
     Includes:
    Trapped by door or other part of bus
V79.9 Bus occupant [any] injured in unspecified traffic accident
     Includes:
    Bus accident NOS
Other land transport accidents
(V80-V89)
V80
Animal-rider or occupant of animal-drawn vehicle injured in transport
accident
V80.0 Animal-rider or occupant of animal-drawn vehicle injured by fall from or being thrown from
     animal or animal-drawn vehicle in noncollision accident
    Includes:
   Overturning:
  •
   NOS
  •
   without collision
V80.1 Animal-rider or occupant of animal-drawn vehicle injured in collision with pedestrian or
     animal
    Excludes:
   collision with animal-drawn vehicle or animal being ridden (V80.7)
V80.2 Animal-rider or occupant of animal-drawn vehicle injured in collision with pedal cycle
V80.3 Animal-rider or occupant of animal-drawn vehicle injured in collision with two- or three-
     wheeled motor vehicle
V80.4 Animal-rider or occupant of animal-drawn vehicle injured in collision with car, pick-up truck,
     van, heavy transport vehicle or bus
V80.5 Animal-rider or occupant of animal-drawn vehicle injured in collision with other specified
     motor vehicle
V80.6 Animal-rider or occupant of animal-drawn vehicle injured in collision with railway train or
     railway vehicle
V80.7 Animal-rider or occupant of animal-drawn vehicle injured in collision with other nonmotor
     vehicle
    Includes:
   Collision with:
  •
   animal being ridden
  •
   animal-drawn vehicle
  •
   streetcar
908
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
V80.8 Animal-rider or occupant of animal-drawn vehicle injured in collision with fixed or stationary
     object
V80.9 Animal-rider or occupant of animal-drawn vehicle injured in other and unspecified transport
     accidents
    Includes:
   Animal-drawn vehicle accident NOS
  Animal-rider accident NOS
V81
V82.4
Occupant of railway train or railway vehicle injured in transport accident
Includes:
person on outside of train
V81.0 Occupant of railway train or railway vehicle injured in collision with motor vehicle in nontraffic
     accident
V81.1 Occupant of railway train or railway vehicle injured in collision with motor vehicle in traffic
     accident
V81.2 Occupant of railway train or railway vehicle injured in collision with or hit by rolling stock
V81.3 Occupant of railway train or railway vehicle injured in collision with other object
     Includes:
    Railway collision NOS
V81.4 Person injured while boarding or alighting from railway train or railway vehicle
V81.5 Occupant of railway train or railway vehicle injured by fall in railway train or railway vehicle
     Excludes:
    fall:
   •
    during derailment with:
   •
    with antecedent collision (V81.0-V81.3)
   •
    without antecedent collision (V81.7)
   •
    while boarding or alighting (V81.4)
V81.6 Occupant of railway train or railway vehicle injured by fall from railway train or railway vehicle
     Excludes:
    fall:
   •
    during derailment with:
   •
    with antecedent collision (V81.0-V81.3)
   •
    without antecedent collision (V81.7)
   •
    while boarding or alighting (V81.4)
V81.7 Occupant of railway train or railway vehicle injured in derailment without antecedent collision
V81.8 Occupant of railway train or railway vehicle injured in other specified railway accident
     Includes:
    Explosion or fire
   Hit by falling:
  •
   earth
  •
   rock
  •
   tree
  Excludes:
 derailment with:
•
 antecedent collision (V81.0-V81.3)
•
 out antecedent collision (V81.7)
V81.9 Occupant of railway train or railway vehicle injured in unspecified railway accident
     Includes:
    Railway accident NOS
V82
Occupant of streetcar injured in transport accident
Includes:
person on outside of streetcar
V82.0 Occupant of streetcar injured in collision with motor vehicle in nontraffic accident
V82.1 Occupant of streetcar injured in collision with motor vehicle in traffic accident
V82.2 Occupant of streetcar injured in collision with or hit by rolling stock
V82.3 Occupant of streetcar injured in collision with other object
     Excludes:
    collision with animal-drawn vehicle or animal being ridden (V82.8)
V82.4 Person injured while boarding or alighting from streetcar
909
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V82.5 Occupant of streetcar injured by fall in streetcar
     Excludes:
    fall:
   •
    while boarding or alighting (V82.4)
   •
    with antecedent collision (V82.0-V82.3)
V82.6 Occupant of streetcar injured by fall from streetcar
     Excludes:
    fall:
   •
    while boarding or alighting (V82.4)
   •
    with antecedent collision (V82.0-V82.3)
V82.7 Occupant of streetcar injured in derailment without antecedent collision
V82.8 Occupant of streetcar injured in other specified transport accident
     Includes:
    Collision with train or other nonmotor vehicle
V82.9 Occupant of streetcar injured in unspecified traffic accident
     Includes:
    Streetcar accident NOS
V82.5
V83
Occupant of special vehicle mainly used on industrial premises injured in
transport accident
Excludes:
vehicle in stationary use or maintenance (W31.-)
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of special vehicle on industrial premises V83.5 V83.0
V83.4
Passenger in special vehicle on industrial premises V83.6 V83.1 V83.4
Person on outside of vehicle V83.7 V83.2 V83.4
Unspecified occupant of special vehicle on industrial V83.9 V83.3 V83.4
premises 
V84
Includes
• Special-industrial-
vehicle accident
NOS
Occupant of special vehicle mainly used in agriculture injured in transport
accident
Excludes:
vehicle in stationary use or maintenance (W30.-)
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of special vehicle used in agriculture V84.5 V84.0
V84.4
Passenger in special vehicle used in agriculture V84.6 V84.1
V84.4
Person on outside of vehicle V84.7 V84.2
V84.4
Unspecified occupant of special vehicle used in agriculture V84.9 V84.3
V84.4
Includes
• Special-agricultural-
vehicle accident
NOS
910
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
V85
Occupant of special construction vehicle injured in transport accident
Excludes:
vehicle in stationary use or maintenance (W31.-)
V86.98o
Injured person Nontraffic Traffic accident While boarding
               accident or alighting
Driver of special construction vehicle V85.5 V85.0
V85.4
Passenger in special construction vehicle V85.6 V85.1
V85.4
Person on outside of vehicle V85.7 V85.2
V85.4
Unspecified occupant of special construction vehicle V85.9 V85.3
V85.4
Includes
• Special-
construction-vehicle
accident NOS
V86
Occupant of special all-terrain or other motor vehicle designed primarily for
off-road use, injured in transport accident
Excludes:
vehicle in stationary use or maintenance (W31.-)
V86.0 Driver of all-terrain or other off road motor vehicle injured in traffic accident
V86.00o Driver of snowmobile injured in traffic accident
V86.08o Driver of other all-terrain or other off road motor vehicle injured in traffic accident
V86.1 Passenger of all-terrain or other off road motor vehicle injured in traffic accident
V86.10o Passenger of snowmobile injured in traffic accident
V86.18o Passenger of other all-terrain or other off road motor vehicle injured in traffic accident
V86.2 Person on outside of all-terrain or other off-road motor vehicle injured in traffic accident
V86.3 Unspecified occupant of all-terrain or other off road motor vehicle injured in traffic accident
V86.30o Unspecified occupant of snowmobile injured in traffic accident
V86.38o Unspecified occupant of other all-terrain or other off road motor vehicle injured in traffic
       accident
V86.4 Person injured while boarding or alighting from all-terrain or other off-road motor vehicle
V86.5 Driver of all-terrain or other off road motor vehicle injured in nontraffic accident
V86.50o Driver of snowmobile injured in nontraffic land accident
V86.51o Driver of snowmobile injured in nontraffic accident, falling through ice
V86.58o Driver of other all-terrain or other off road motor vehicle injured in nontraffic accident
V86.6 Passenger of all-terrain or other off road motor vehicle injured in nontraffic accident
V86.60o Passenger of snowmobile injured in nontraffic land accident
V86.61o Passenger of snowmobile injured in nontraffic accident, falling through ice
V86.68o Passenger of other all-terrain or other off road motor vehicle injured in nontraffic accident
V86.7 Person on outside of all-terrain or other off-road motor vehicle injured in nontraffic accident
V86.9 Unspecified occupant of all-terrain or other off road motor vehicle injured in nontraffic
     accident
    Includes:
   All-terrain motor-vehicle accident NOS
  Off-road motor-vehicle accident NOS
V86.90o Unspecified occupant of snowmobile injured in nontraffic land accident
V86.91o Unspecified occupant of snowmobile injured in nontraffic accident, falling through ice
V86.98o Unspecified occupant of other all-terrain or other off road motor vehicle injured in nontraffic
       accident
911
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V87
Traffic accident of specified type but victim's mode of transport unknown
Excludes:
V87
collision involving:
•
pedal cyclist (V10-V19)
•
pedestrian (V01-V09)
V87.0 Person injured in collision between car and two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle (traffic)
V87.1 Person injured in collision between other motor vehicle and two- or three-wheeled motor
     vehicle (traffic)
V87.2 Person injured in collision between car and pick-up truck or van (traffic)
V87.3 Person injured in collision between car and bus (traffic)
V87.4 Person injured in collision between car and heavy transport vehicle (traffic)
V87.5 Person injured in collision between heavy transport vehicle and bus (traffic)
V87.6 Person injured in collision between railway train or railway vehicle and car (traffic)
V87.7 Person injured in collision between other specified motor vehicle (traffic)
V87.8 Person injured in other specified noncollision transport accident involving motor vehicle
     (traffic)
V87.9 Person injured in other specified (collision)(noncollision) transport accident involving
     nonmotor vehicle (traffic)
V88
Nontraffic accident of specified type but victim's mode of transport unknown
Excludes:
collision involving:
•
pedal cyclist (V10-V19)
•
pedestrian (V01-V09)
V88.0 Person injured in collision between car and two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle, nontraffic
V88.1 Person injured in collision between other motor vehicle and two- or three-wheeled motor
     vehicle, nontraffic
V88.2 Person injured in collision between car and pick-up truck or van, nontraffic
V88.3 Person injured in collision between car and bus, nontraffic
V88.4 Person injured in collision between car and heavy transport vehicle, nontraffic
V88.5 Person injured in collision between heavy transport vehicle and bus, nontraffic
V88.6 Person injured in collision between railway train or railway vehicle and car, nontraffic
V88.7 Person injured in collision between other specified motor vehicle, nontraffic accident
V88.8 Person injured in other specified noncollision transport accident involving motor vehicle,
     nontraffic
V88.9 Person injured in other specified (collision)(noncollision) transport accident involving
     nonmotor vehicle, nontraffic
V89
Motor- or nonmotor-vehicle accident, type of vehicle unspecified
V89.0 Person injured in unspecified nontraffic motor-vehicle accident
     Includes:
    Motor-vehicle accident NOS, nontraffic
V89.1 Person injured in unspecified nontraffic nonmotor-vehicle accident
     Includes:
    Nonmotor-vehicle accident NOS (nontraffic)
V89.2 Person injured in unspecified traffic motor-vehicle accident
     Includes:
    Motor-vehicle accident [MVA] NOS
   Road (traffic) accident [RTA] NOS
V89.3 Person injured in unspecified traffic nonmotor-vehicle accident
     Includes:
    Nonmotor-vehicle traffic accident NOS
V89.9 Person injured in unspecified vehicle accident
     Includes:
    Collision NOS
912
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Water transport accidents
(V90-V94)
Includes:
V90
V91.2
watercraft accidents in the course of recreational activities
Accident to watercraft causing drowning and submersion
Includes:
Excludes:
drowning and submersion due to:
•
falling or jumping from crushed watercraft
•
boat:
•
overturning
•
sinking
•
falling or jumping from burning ship
•
other accident to watercraft
water-transport-related drowning or submersion without accident to watercraft (V92.-)
V90.0 Accident to watercraft causing drowning and submersion, merchant ship
V90.1 Accident to watercraft causing drowning and submersion, passenger ship
     Includes:
    Ferry-boat
   Liner
V90.2 Accident to watercraft causing drowning and submersion, fishing boat
V90.3 Accident to watercraft causing drowning and submersion, other powered watercraft
     Includes:
    Hovercraft (on open water)
   Jet skis
V90.4 Accident to watercraft causing drowning and submersion, sailboat
     Includes:
    Yacht
V90.5 Accident to watercraft causing drowning and submersion, canoe or kayak
V90.6 Accident to watercraft causing drowning and submersion, inflatable craft (nonpowered)
V90.7 Accident to watercraft causing drowning and submersion, water-skis
V90.8 Accident to watercraft causing drowning and submersion, other unpowered watercraft
     Includes:
    Surf board
   Windsurfer
V90.9 Accident to watercraft causing drowning and submersion, unspecified watercraft
     Includes:
    Boat NOS
   Ship NOS
  Watercraft NOS
V91
Accident to watercraft causing other injury
Includes:
Excludes:
any injury except drowning and submersion as a result of an accident to watercraft
burned while ship on fire
crushed between colliding ships
crushed by lifeboat after abandoning ship
fall due to collision or other accident to watercraft
hit by falling object as a result of accident to watercraft
injured in watercraft accident involving collision of watercraft
struck by boat or part thereof after falling or jumping from damaged boat
burns from localized fire or explosion on board ship (V93.-)
V91.0 Accident to watercraft causing other injury, merchant ship
V91.1 Accident to watercraft causing other injury, passenger ship
     Includes:
    Ferry-boat
   Liner
V91.2 Accident to watercraft causing other injury, fishing boat
913
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V91.3 Accident to watercraft causing other injury, other powered watercraft
     Includes:
    Hovercraft (on open water)
   Jet skis
V91.4 Accident to watercraft causing other injury, sailboat
     Includes:
    Yacht
V91.5 Accident to watercraft causing other injury, canoe or kayak
V91.6 Accident to watercraft causing other injury, inflatable craft (nonpowered)
V91.7 Accident to watercraft causing other injury, water-skis
V91.8 Accident to watercraft causing other injury, other unpowered watercraft
     Includes:
    Surf-board
   Windsurfer
V91.9 Accident to watercraft causing other injury, unspecified watercraft
     Includes:
    Boat NOS
   Ship NOS
  Watercraft NOS
V91.3
V92
Water-transport-related drowning and submersion without accident to
watercraft
Includes:
Excludes:
drowning and submersion as a result of an accident, such as:
•
fall:
•
from gangplank
•
from ship
•
overboard
•
thrown overboard by motion of ship
•
washed overboard
drowning or submersion of swimmer or diver who voluntarily jumps from boat not involved in
an accident (W69.-,W73.-)
V92.0 Water-transport-related drowning and submersion without accident to watercraft, merchant
     ship
V92.1 Water-transport-related drowning and submersion without accident to watercraft, passenger
     ship
    Includes:
   Ferry-boat NOS
  Liner
V92.2 Water-transport-related drowning and submersion without accident to watercraft, fishing boat
V92.3 Water-transport-related drowning and submersion without accident to watercraft, other
     powered watercraft
    Includes:
   Hovercraft (on open water)
  Jet skis
V92.4 Water-transport-related drowning and submersion without accident to watercraft, sailboat
     Includes:
    Yacht
V92.5 Water-transport-related drowning and submersion without accident to watercraft, canoe or
     kayak
V92.6 Water-transport-related drowning and submersion without accident to watercraft, inflatable
     craft (nonpowered)
V92.7 Water-transport-related drowning and submersion without accident to watercraft, water-skis
V92.8 Water-transport-related drowning and submersion without accident to watercraft, other
     unpowered watercraft
    Includes:
   Surf-board
  Windsurfer
914
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
V92.9
V93
Water-transport-related drowning and submersion without accident to watercraft, unspecified
watercraft
Includes:
Boat NOS
Ship NOS
Watercraft NOS
V93.8
Accident on board watercraft without accident to watercraft, not causing
drowning and submersion
Includes:
accidental poisoning by gases or fumes on ship
atomic reactor malfunction on ship in watercraft
crushed by falling object on ship
excessive heat in:
•
boiler room
•
engine room
•
evaporator room
•
fire room
explosion of boiler on steamship
fall from one level to another in watercraft
fall on stairs or ladders in watercraft
injuries in watercraft caused by:
•
deck machinery
•
engine room machinery
•
galley machinery
•
laundry machinery
•
loading machinery
localized fire on ship
machinery accident on ship in watercraft
V93.0 Accident on board watercraft without accident to watercraft, not causing drowning and
     submersion, merchant ship
V93.1 Accident on board watercraft without accident to watercraft, not causing drowning and
     submersion, passenger ship
    Includes:
   Ferry-boat
  Liner
V93.2 Accident on board watercraft without accident to watercraft, not causing drowning and
     submersion, fishing boat
V93.3 Accident on board watercraft without accident to watercraft, not causing drowning and
     submersion, other powered watercraft
    Includes:
   Hovercraft (on open water)
  Jet skis
V93.4 Accident on board watercraft without accident to watercraft, not causing drowning and
     submersion, sailboat
    Includes:
   Yacht
V93.5 Accident on board watercraft without accident to watercraft, not causing drowning and
     submersion, canoe or kayak
V93.6 Accident on board watercraft without accident to watercraft, not causing drowning and
     submersion, inflatable craft (nonpowered)
V93.7 Accident on board watercraft without accident to watercraft, not causing drowning and
     submersion, water-skis
V93.8 Accident on board watercraft without accident to watercraft, not causing drowning and
     submersion, other unpowered watercraft
    Includes:
   Surf-board
  Windsurfer
915
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V93.9
V93.9
V94
Accident on board watercraft without accident to watercraft, not causing drowning and
submersion, unspecified watercraft
Includes:
Boat NOS
Ship NOS
Watercraft NOS
Other and unspecified water transport accidents
Includes:
accident to nonoccupant of watercraft
hit by boat while water-skiing
V94.0 Other and unspecified water transport accident, merchant ship
V94.1 Other and unspecified water transport accident, passenger ship
     Includes:
    Ferry-boat
   Liner
V94.2 Other and unspecified water transport accident, fishing boat
V94.3 Other and unspecified water transport accident, other powered watercraft
     Includes:
    Hovercraft (on open water)
   Jet skis
V94.4 Other and unspecified water transport accident, sailboat
     Includes:
    Yacht
V94.5 Other and unspecified water transport accident, canoe or kayak
V94.6 Other and unspecified water transport accident, inflatable craft (nonpowered)
V94.7 Other and unspecified water transport accident, water-skis
V94.8 Other and unspecified water transport accident, other unpowered watercraft
     Includes:
    Surf-board
   Windsurfer
V94.9 Other and unspecified water transport accident, unspecified watercraft
     Includes:
    Boat NOS
   Ship NOS
  Watercraft NOS
Air and space transport accidents
(V95-V97)
V95
Accident to powered aircraft causing injury to occupant
Includes:
collision with any object,
fixed, movable or moving
crash
explosion
fire
forced landing
of or on (powered) aircraft
V95.0 Helicopter accident injuring occupant
V95.1 Ultralight, microlight or powered-glider accident injuring occupant
V95.2 Accident to other private fixed-wing aircraft, injuring occupant
V95.3 Accident to commercial fixed-wing aircraft, injuring occupant
V95.4 Spacecraft accident injuring occupant
V95.8 Other aircraft accident injuring occupant
916
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
V95.9
V96
Unspecified aircraft accident injuring occupant
Includes:
Air transport accident NOS
Aircraft transport accident NOS
V97.8
Accident to nonpowered aircraft causing injury to occupant
Includes:
collision with any object,
fixed, movable or moving
crash
explosion
fire
forced landing
of or on nonpowered aircraft
V96.0 Balloon accident injuring occupant
V96.1 Hang-glider accident injuring occupant
V96.2 Glider (nonpowered) accident injuring occupant
V96.8 Other nonpowered-aircraft accident injuring occupant
     Includes:
    Kite carrying a person
V96.9 Unspecified nonpowered-aircraft accident injuring occupant
     Includes:
    Nonpowered-aircraft accident NOS
V97
Other specified air transport accident
Includes:
accidents to nonoccupants of aircraft
V97.0 Occupant of aircraft injured in other specified air transport accident
     Includes:
    Fall in, on or from aircraft in air transport accident
   Excludes:
  accident while boarding or alighting (V97.1)
V97.1 Person injured while boarding or alighting from aircraft
V97.2 Parachutist injured in air transport accident
     Excludes:
    person making descent after accident to aircraft (V95-V96)
V97.3 Person on ground injured in air transport accident
     Includes:
    Hit by object falling from aircraft
   Injured by rotating propeller
  Sucked into jet
V97.8 Other air transport accident, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Injury from machinery on aircraft
   Excludes:
  aircraft accident NOS (V95.9)
 exposure to changes in air pressure during ascent or descent (W94.-)
917
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
V98
Other and unspecified transport accidents
(V98-V99)
Excludes:
V98
vehicle accident, type of vehicle unspecified (V89.-)
Other specified transport accident
Includes:
accident to, on or involving:
•
cable-car, not on rails
•
ice-yacht
•
land-yacht
•
ski chair-lift
•
ski-lift with gondola
caught or dragged by
fall or jump from
object thrown from or in
V99
918
Unspecified transport accident
cable-car, not on rails
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Other external causes of accidental injury
(W00-X59)
W05.04o
Falls
(W00-W19)
Use additional code from category (U98.-) to identify place of occurrence.
Excludes:
assault (Y01-Y02)
fall (in)(from):
•
animal (V80.-)
•
burning building (X00.-)
•
into:
•
fire (X00-X04, X08-X09)
•
water (with drowning or submersion) (W65-W74)
•
machinery (in operation) (W28-W31)
•
transport vehicle (V01-V99)
intentional self-harm (X80-X81)
repeated falls not resulting from accident (R29.6)
W00
Fall on same level involving ice and snow
Excludes:
W01
Fall on same level from slipping, tripping and stumbling
Excludes:
W02
fall with mention of:
•
snowboards (W02.-)
•
ice-skates and skis (W02.-)
•
stairs and steps (W10.-)
fall involving ice or snow (W00.-)
Fall involving skates, skis, sport boards and in-line skates
W02.00o Fall involving ice skates
W02.01o Fall involving skis
W02.02o Fall involving roller skates/in-line skates
W02.03o Fall involving skateboard
W02.04o Fall involving snowboard
W02.08o Fall other specified
       Includes:
      Non motorized scooter
W03
Other fall on same level due to collision with, or pushing by, another person
Includes:
Excludes:
W04
Fall while being carried or supported by other persons
Includes:
W05
fall due to collision of pedestrian (conveyance) with another pedestrian (conveyance)
crushed or pushed by crowd or human stampede (W52.-)
fall involving ice or snow (W00.-)
accidentally dropped while being carried
Fall involving wheelchair and other types of walking devices
W05.00o Fall involving wheelchair
       Includes:
      Fall involving motorized scooter
W05.01o Fall involving adult walker
W05.02o Fall involving baby walker
W05.03o Fall involving stroller/carriage
W05.04o Fall involving shopping cart
919
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
W05.08o 
W05.08o
Fall involving other specified walking devices
W05.09o Fall involving unspecified walking devices
W06 Fall involving bed
W07 Fall involving chair
W08 Fall involving other furniture
Includes:
W09
Changing table (of infant or child)
Fall involving playground equipment
Excludes:
fall involving recreational machinery (W31.-)
W09.01o Fall involving swing
W09.02o Fall involving slide
W09.03o Fall involving teeter totter
W09.04o Fall involving monkey bars
W09.05o Fall involving trampoline
W09.08o Fall involving other playground equipment
W09.09o Fall involving unspecified playground equipment
W10
Fall on and from stairs and steps
Includes:
fall (on)(from):
•
escalator
•
incline
•
involving ice or snow on stairs and steps
•
ramp
W11 Fall on and from ladder
W12 Fall on and from scaffolding
W13 Fall from, out of or through building or structure
Includes:
Excludes:
fall from, out of or through:
•
balcony
•
bridge
•
building
•
flag-pole
•
floor
•
railing
•
roof
•
tower
•
turret
•
viaduct
•
wall
•
window
collapse of a building or structure (W20)
fall or jump from burning building or structure (X00)
W14 Fall from tree
W15 Fall from cliff
920
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
W16
Diving or jumping into water causing injury other than drowning or
submersion
Includes:
Excludes:
W17
Other fall from one level to another
Includes:
W18
fall from or into:
•
cavity
•
dock
•
haystack
•
hole
•
pit
•
quarry
•
shaft
•
tank
•
well
Other fall on same level
Includes:
W19
W20
striking or hitting:
•
against bottom when jumping or diving into shallow water
•
wall or diving board of swimming-pool
•
water surface
accidental drowning and submersion (W65-W74)
diving with insufficient air supply (W81.-)
effects of air pressure from diving (W94.-)
fall:
•
from bumping against object
•
from or off toilet
•
on same level NOS
Unspecified fall
Includes:
accidental fall NOS
Exposure to inanimate mechanical forces
(W20-W49)
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
Excludes:
assault (X85-Y09)
contact or collision with animals or persons (W50-W64)
intentional self-harm (X60-X84)
W20
Struck by thrown, projected or falling object
Includes:
Excludes:
cave-in without asphyxiation or suffocation
collapse of building, except on fire
falling:
•
rock
•
stone
•
tree
collapse or burning building (X00.-)
falling object in:
•
cataclysm (X34-X39)
•
machinery accident (W24.-) (W28-W31)
•
transport accident (V01-V99)
object set in motion by:
•
explosion (W35-W40)
•
firearm (W32-W34)
sports equipment (W21.-)
921
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
W21
Striking against or struck by sports equipment
Includes:
W21
struck by:
•
frisbee
•
hit or thrown ball
•
hockey stick or puck
W21.00o Striking against or struck by ball
W21.01o Striking against or struck by bat
W21.02o Striking against or struck by hockey stick
W21.03o Striking against or struck by hockey puck
W21.08o Striking against or struck by other specified sport equipment
W21.09o Striking against or struck by other unspecified sport equipment
W22
Striking against or struck by other objects
Includes:
Excludes:
striking post, sign, tree
walked into wall
contact with other person (W50 - W52)
sports equipment (W21)
W22.00o Striking against or struck by/while skiing/snowboarding
W22.01o Striking against or struck while tobogganing
W22.02o Striking against or struck by/playing hockey
W22.03o Striking against or struck by/playing football/rugby
W22.04o Striking against or struck by/playing soccer
W22.05o Striking against or struck by/playing baseball
W22.07o Striking against or struck by/in other sports/recreation
W22.08o Striking against or struck by/in non-sports
W22.09o Striking against or struck by unspecified
W23
Caught, crushed, jammed or pinched in or between objects
Includes:
caught, crushed, jammed or pinched between:
•
•
•
Excludes:
W24
such as
folding object
packing crate and floor, after losing grip
sliding door and door-frame
washing-machine wringer
injury caused by:
•
cutting or piercing instruments (W25-W27)
•
lifting and transmission devices (W24.-)
•
machinery (W28-W31)
•
nonpowered hand tools (W27.-)
•
transport vehicle being used as a means of transportation (V01-V99)
struck by thrown, projected or falling object (W20.-)
Contact with lifting and transmission devices, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Excludes:
922
in object
moving objects
stationary and moving objects
chain hoist
drive belt
pulley (block)
rope
transmission belt or cable
winch
wire
transport accidents (V01-V99)
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
W25
Contact with sharp glass
Excludes:
fall involving glass (W00-W19)
flying glass due to explosion or firearm discharge (W32-W40)
W26 Contact with knife, sword or dagger
W27 
W31
Contact with nonpowered hand tool
Includes:
Excludes:
W28
Contact with powered lawnmower
Excludes:
W29
Excludes:
blender
powered:
•
can-opener
•
chain-saw
•
do-it-yourself tool
•
garden tool
•
hedge-trimmer
•
knife
•
sewing-machine
•
spin-drier
washing-machine
exposure to electric current (W86.-)
Contact with agricultural machinery
Includes:
Excludes:
W31
exposure to electric current (W86.-)
Contact with other powered hand tools and household machinery
Includes:
W30
axe
can-opener NOS
chisel
fork
handsaw
hoe
ice-pick
needle
paper-cutter
pitchfork
rake
scissors
screwdriver
sewing-machine, nonpowered
shovel
hypodermic needle(W46)
animal-powered farm machine
combine harvester
derrick, hay
farm machinery NOS
reaper
thresher
contact with agricultural machinery in transport under own power or being towed by a vehicle
(V01-V99)
exposure to electric current (W86.-)
Contact with other and unspecified machinery
Includes:
Excludes:
machine NOS
recreational machinery
contact with machinery in transport under own power or being towed by a vehicle (V01-V99)
exposure to electric current (W86.-)
923
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
W32
Handgun discharge
Includes:
W32
Excludes:
W33
Rifle, shotgun and larger firearm discharge
Includes:
Excludes:
W34
gun for single hand use
pistol
revolver
Very pistol (W34.-)
army rifle
hunting rifle
machine gun
airgun (W34.-)
Discharge from other and unspecified firearms
Includes:
gunshot wound NOS
shot NOS
Very pistol [flare]
W34.00o Discharge from BB gun
W34.01o Discharge from air gun
W34.08o Discharge from other specified firearm
W34.09o Discharge from unspecified firearm
W35 Explosion and rupture of boiler
W36 Explosion and rupture of gas cylinder
Includes:
aerosol can
air tank
pressurized-gas tank
W37 Explosion and rupture of pressurized tyre, pipe or hose
W38 Explosion and rupture of other specified pressurized devices
W39 Discharge of firework
W40 Explosion of other materials
Includes:
W41
Exposure to high-pressure jet
Includes:
W42
sound waves
supersonic waves
Exposure to vibration
Includes:
924
hydraulic jet
pneumatic jet
Exposure to noise
Includes:
W43
blasting material
explosion (in):
•
NOS
•
dump
•
factory
•
grain store
•
munitions
explosive gas
infrasound waves
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
W44
Foreign body entering into or through eye or natural orifice
Excludes:
W45
Excludes:
edge of stiff paper
nail
splinter
tin-can lid
contact with:
•
hand tools (nonpowered) (powered) (W27-W29)
•
hypodermic needle (W46)
•
knife, sword or dagger (W26)
•
sharp glass (W25)
struck by objects (W20-W22)
Contact with hypodermic needle
Includes:
W49
W55
Foreign body or object entering through skin
Includes:
W46
corrosive fluid (X49.-)
inhalation or ingestion of foreign body with obstruction of respiratory tract (W78-W80)
Lancet
Exposure to other and unspecified inanimate mechanical forces
Includes:
abnormal gravitational [G] forces
Exposure to animate mechanical forces
(W50-W64)
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
Excludes:
bites, venomous (X20-X29)
stings (venomous) (X20-X29)
W50
Hit, struck, kicked, twisted, bitten or scratched by another person
Excludes:
W51
assault (X85-Y09)
struck by objects (W20-W22)
Striking against or bumped into by another person
Excludes:
fall due to collision of pedestrian (conveyance) with another pedestrian (conveyance) (W03.-)
W51.00o Striking against or bumped into by another person in skiing/snowboarding
W51.01o Striking against or bumped into by another person in tobogganing
W51.02o Striking against or bumped into by another person in hockey
W51.03o Striking against or bumped into by another person in football/rugby
W51.04o Striking against or bumped into by another person in soccer
W51.05o Striking against or bumped into by another person in baseball
W51.07o Striking against or bumped into by another person in other sports/recreation
W51.08o Striking against or bumped into by another person in non-sports
W51.09o Striking against or bumped into by another unspecified person
W52 Crushed, pushed or stepped on by crowd or human stampede
W53 Bitten by rat
W54 Bitten or struck by dog
W55 Bitten or struck by other mammals
Excludes:
contact with marine mammal (W56.-)
925
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
W56
Contact with marine animal
Includes:
W56
Bitten or struck by marine animal
W57 Bitten or stung by nonvenomous insect and other nonvenomous arthropods
W58 Bitten or struck by crocodile or alligator
W59 Bitten or crushed by other reptiles
Includes:
lizard
snake, nonvenomous
W60 Contact with plant thorns and spines and sharp leaves
W64 Exposure to other and unspecified animate mechanical forces
Accidental drowning and submersion
(W65-W74)
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
Excludes:
drowning and submersion due to:
•
cataclysm (X34-X39)
•
transport accidents (V01-V99)
•
water transport accident (V90.-,V92.-)
W65 Drowning and submersion while in bath-tub
W66 Drowning and submersion following fall into bath-tub
W67 Drowning and submersion while in swimming-pool
W68 Drowning and submersion following fall into swimming-pool
W69 Drowning and submersion while in natural water
Includes:
lake
open sea
river
stream
W70 Drowning and submersion following fall into natural water
W73 Other specified drowning and submersion
Includes:
W74
Unspecified drowning and submersion
Includes:
926
quenching tank
reservoir
drowning NOS
fall into water NOS
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Other accidental threats to breathing
(W75-W84)
W79
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
W75
Accidental suffocation and strangulation in bed
Includes:
suffocation and strangulation due to:
•
bed linen
•
mother's body
•
pillow
W76 Other accidental hanging and strangulation
W77 Threat to breathing due to cave-in, falling earth and other substances
Includes:
Excludes:
W78
cave-in NOS
cave-in:
•
caused by cataclysm (X34-X39)
•
without asphyxiation or suffocation (W20.-)
Inhalation of gastric contents
Includes:
asphyxia by
choked on
vomitus [regurgitated food]
suffocation by
aspiration and inhalation of vomitus (into respiratory tract) NOS
Excludes:
W79
compression of trachea
interruption of respiration
by vomitus in oesophagus
obstruction of respiration
injury, except asphyxia or obstruction of respiratory tract, caused by vomitus (W44.-)
obstruction of oesophagus by vomitus without mention of asphyxia or obstruction of respiratory
tract (W44.-)
Inhalation and ingestion of food causing obstruction of respiratory tract
Includes:
asphyxia by
choked on
food [including bone or seed]
suffocation by
aspiration and inhalation of food [any] (into respiratory tract) NOS
Excludes:
compression of trachea
interruption of respiration
by food in oesophagus
obstruction of respiration
obstruction of pharynx by food (bolus)
inhalation of vomitus (W78.-)
injury, except asphyxia or obstruction of respiratory tract, caused by food (W44.-)
obstruction of oesophagus by food without mention of asphyxia or obstruction of respiratory
tract (W44.-)
927
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
W80
W80
Inhalation and ingestion of other objects causing obstruction of respiratory
tract
Includes:
asphyxia by
choked on
suffocation by
any object, except food or vomitus, entering by nose or mouth
aspiration and inhalation of foreign body, except food or vomitus (into respiratory tract), NOS
compression of trachea
interruption of respiration
obstruction of respiration
Excludes:
W81
Excludes:
accidentally shut in refrigerator or other airtight space
diving with insufficient air supply
suffocation by plastic bag (W83.-)
Other specified threats to breathing
Includes:
W84
foreign object in nose
obstruction of pharynx by foreign body
inhalation of vomitus or food (W78-W79)
injury, except asphyxia or obstruction of respiratory tract, caused by foreign body (W44.-)
obstruction of oesophagus by foreign body without mention of asphyxia or obstruction of
respiratory tract (W44.-)
Confined to or trapped in a low-oxygen environment
Includes:
W83
by foreign body in oesophagus
suffocation by plastic bag
Unspecified threat to breathing
Includes:
asphyxiation NOS
aspiration NOS
suffocation NOS
Exposure to electric current, radiation and extreme ambient air
temperature and pressure (W85-W99)
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
Excludes:
abnormal reaction to a complication of treatment, without mention of misadventure (Y84.2)
exposure to:
•
natural:
•
cold (X31.-)
•
heat (X30.-)
•
radiation NOS (X39.-)
•
sunlight (X32.-)
misadventure to patient in surgical and medical procedures (Y63.2 - Y63.5)
victim of lightning (X33.-)
W85 Exposure to electric transmission lines
W86 Exposure to other specified electric current
W87 Exposure to unspecified electric current
Includes:
W88
Exposure to ionizing radiation
Includes:
928
burns or other injury from electric current NOS
electric shock NOS
electrocution NOS
radioactive isotopes
Xrays
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
W89
Exposure to man-made visible and ultraviolet light
Includes:
W90
welding light (arc)
X00
Exposure to other nonionizing radiation
Includes:
infrared radiation
laser radiation
radiofrequency radiation
W91 Exposure to unspecified type of radiation
W92 Exposure to excessive heat of man-made origin
W93 Exposure to excessive cold of man-made origin
Includes:
W94
Exposure to high and low air pressure and changes in air pressure
Includes:
W99
contact with or inhalation of:
•
dry ice
•
liquid:
•
air
•
hydrogen
•
nitrogen
prolonged exposure in deep-freeze unit
high air pressure from rapid descent in water reduction in atmospheric pressure while surfacing
from:
•
deep-water diving
•
underground
residence or prolonged visit at high altitude as the cause of:
•
anoxia
•
barodontalgia
•
barotitis
•
hypoxia
•
mountain sickness
sudden change in air pressure in aircraft during ascent or descent
Exposure to other and unspecified man-made environmental factors
Exposure to smoke, fire and flames
(X00-X09)
Includes:
fire caused by lightning
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
Excludes:
arson (X97.-)
secondary fire resulting from explosion (W35-W40)
transport accidents (V01-V99)
X00
Exposure to uncontrolled fire in building or structure
Includes:
collapse of
fall from
hit by object falling from
jump from
burning building or structure
conflagration
fire
melting
smouldering
of
fittings
furniture
929
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
X01
Exposure to uncontrolled fire, not in building or structure
Includes:
X01
X02
Exposure to controlled fire in building or structure
Includes:
X03
fire in:
•
fireplace
•
stove
Exposure to controlled fire, not in building or structure
Includes:
X04
forest fire
camp-fire
Exposure to ignition of highly flammable material
Includes:
ignition of:
•
gasoline
•
kerosene
•
petrol
X05 Exposure to ignition or melting of nightwear
X06 Exposure to ignition or melting of other clothing and apparel
Includes:
ignition
melting
of plastic jewellery
X08 Exposure to other specified smoke, fire and flames
X09 Exposure to unspecified smoke, fire and flames
Includes:
burning NOS
incineration NOS
Contact with heat and hot substances
(X10-X19)
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
Excludes:
exposure to:
•
excessive natural heat (X30.-)
•
fire and flames (X00-X09)
X10 Contact with hot drinks, food, fats and cooking oils
X11 Contact with hot tap-water
Includes:
X12
hot water in:
•
bath
•
bucket
•
tub
hot water running out of:
•
hose
•
tap
Contact with other hot fluids
Includes:
Excludes:
water heated on stove
hot (liquid) metals (X18.-)
X13 Contact with steam and hot vapours
X14 Contact with hot air and gases
Includes:
930
inhalation of hot air and gases
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
X15
Contact with hot household appliances
Excludes:
heating appliances (X16.-)
X15.00o X15.01o Contact with hot plate
X15.02o Contact with iron
X15.03o Contact with curling iron (ceramic iron) (flat iron)
X15.04o Contact with toaster
X15.05o Contact with saucepan (glass) (metal)
X15.06o Contact with kettle
X15.07o Contact with pot
X15.08o Contact with other hot household appliances
X15.09o 
X22
Contact with stove (cooker) (kitchen stove) (oven)
Contact with unspecified hot household appliances
X16 Contact with hot heating appliances, radiators and pipes
X17 Contact with hot engines, machinery and tools
Excludes:
X18
Contact with other hot metals
Includes:
X19
hot heating appliances, radiators and pipes (X16.-)
hot household appliances (X15.-)
liquid metal
Contact with other and unspecified heat and hot substances
Excludes:
objects that are not normally hot, e.g., an object made hot by a house fire (X00-X09)
Contact with venomous animals and plants
(X20-X29)
Includes:
chemical released by:
•
animal
•
insect
release of venom through fangs, hairs, spines, tentacles and other venom apparatus
venomous bites and stings
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
Excludes:
ingestion of poisonous animals or plants (X49.-)
X20
Contact with venomous snakes and lizards
Includes:
Excludes:
X21
Contact with venomous spiders
Includes:
X22
cobra
fer de lance
Gila monster
krait
rattlesnake
sea snake
snake (venomous)
viper
lizard (nonvenomous) (W59.-)
snake, nonvenomous (W59.-)
black widow spider
tarantula
Contact with scorpions
931
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
X23
Contact with hornets, wasps and bees
Includes:
X23
yellow jacket
X24 Contact with centipedes and venomous millipedes (tropical)
X25 Contact with other venomous arthropods
Includes:
X26
ant
caterpillar
Contact with venomous marine animals and plants
Includes:
Excludes:
coral
jellyfish
nematocysts
sea:
•
anemone
•
cucumber
•
urchin
nonvenomous marine animals (W56.-)
sea snakes (X20.-)
X27 Contact with other specified venomous animals
X28 Contact with other specified venomous plants
Includes:
Excludes:
X29
injection of poisons or toxins into or through skin by plant thorns, spines or other mechanisms
ingestion of poisonous plants (X49.-)
puncture wound NOS caused by plant thorns or spines (W60.-)
Contact with unspecified venomous animal or plant
Includes:
sting (venomous) NOS
venomous bite NOS
Exposure to forces of nature
(X30-X39)
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
X30
Exposure to excessive natural heat
Includes:
Excludes:
X31
excessive heat as the cause of sunstroke
exposure to heat NOS
excessive heat of man-made origin (W92.-)
Exposure to excessive natural cold
Includes:
Excludes:
excessive cold as the cause of:
•
chilblains NOS
•
immersion foot or hand
exposure to:
•
cold NOS
•
weather conditions
cold of man-made origin (W93.-)
contact with or inhalation of:
•
dry ice (W93.-)
•
liquefied gas (W93.-)
X32 Exposure to sunlight
X33 Victim of lightning
Excludes:
932
fire caused by lightning (X00-X09)
injury from fall of tree or other object caused by lightning (W20.-)
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
X34
Victim of earthquake
X34.0 X34.1 Victim of tsunami
X34.8 Victim of other specified effects of earthquake
X34.9 
X39
Victim of cataclysmic earth movements caused by earthquake
Includes:
trapped in or injured by collapsing building or other structure
Victim of unspecified effects of earthquake
X35 Victim of volcanic eruption
X36 Victim of avalanche, landslide and other earth movements
Includes:
Excludes:
X37
mudslide of cataclysmic nature
earthquake (X34.-)
transport accident involving collision with avalanche or landslide not in motion (V01-V99)
Victim of cataclysmic storm
Includes:
Excludes:
blizzard
cloudburst
cyclone
tidal wave caused by storm
torrential rain
transport vehicle washed off road by storm
collapse of dam or man-made structure causing earth movement (X36.-)
transport accident occurring after storm (V01-V99)
X37.00o Victim of snow/ice storm
X37.01o Victim of hurricane/tropical storm
X37.02o Victim of tornado
X37.08o Victim of other specified storm
X37.09o Victim of unspecified storm
X38
Victim of flood
Includes:
Excludes:
X39
flood:
•
arising from remote storm
•
of cataclysmic nature arising from melting snow
•
resulting directly from storm
collapse of dam or man-made structure causing earth movement (X36.-)
tidal wave:
•
NOS (X39.-)
•
caused by storm (X37.-)
Exposure to other and unspecified forces of nature
Includes:
Excludes:
natural radiation NOS
tidal wave NOS
exposure NOS (X59.9)
tsunami (X34.1)
933
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
X40
Accidental poisoning by and exposure to noxious substances
(X40-X49)
Note:
For list of specific drugs and other substances classified under the three-character categories, see Table of drugs
and chemicals in Alphabetical Index. Evidence of alcohol involvement in combination with substances
specified below may be identified by using the supplementary codes Y90-Y91.
Includes:
(self-inflicted) poisoning, when not specified whether accidental or with intent to harm.
accidental overdose of drug, wrong drug given or taken in error, and drug taken inadvertently
accidents in the use of drugs, medicaments and biological substances in medical and surgical procedures
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
Excludes:
administration with suicidal or homicidal intent, or intent to harm, or in other circumstances classifiable to
(X60-X69),(X85-X90), (Y10-Y19)
correct drug properly administered in therapeutic or prophylactic dosage as the cause of any adverse effect
(Y40-Y59)
X40
Accidental poisoning by and exposure to nonopioid analgesics, antipyretics
and antirheumatics
Includes:
X41
Accidental poisoning by and exposure to antiepileptic, sedative-hypnotic,
antiparkinsonism and psychotropic drugs, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
X42
cannabis (derivatives)
cocaine
codeine
heroin
lysergide [LSD]
mescaline
methadone
morphine
opium (alkaloids)
Accidental poisoning by and exposure to other drugs acting on the
autonomic nervous system
Includes:
934
antidepressants
barbiturates
hydantoin derivatives
iminostilbenes
methaqualone compounds
neuroleptics
psychostimulants
succinimides and oxazolidinediones
tranquillizers
Accidental poisoning by and exposure to narcotics and psychodysleptics
[hallucinogens], not elsewhere classified
Includes:
X43
4-aminophenol derivatives
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAID]
pyrazolone derivatives
salicylates
parasympatholytics [anticholinergics and antimuscarinics] and spasmolytics
parasympathomimetics [cholinergics]
sympatholytics [antiadrenergics]
sympathomimetics [adrenergics]
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
X44
Accidental poisoning by and exposure to other and unspecified drugs,
medicaments and biological substances
Includes:
X45
Accidental poisoning by and exposure to alcohol
Includes:
X46
benzene and homologues
carbon tetrachloride [tetrachloromethane]
chlorofluorocarbons
petroleum (derivatives)
Accidental poisoning by and exposure to other gases and vapours
Includes:
Excludes:
X48
alcohol:
•
NOS
•
butyl [1-butanol]
•
ethyl [ethanol]
•
isopropyl [2-propanol]
•
methyl [methanol]
•
propyl [1-propanol]
fusel oil
Accidental poisoning by and exposure to organic solvents and halogenated
hydrocarbons and their vapours
Includes:
X47
X48
agents primarily acting on smooth and skeletal muscles and the respiratory system
anaesthetics (general)(local)
drugs affecting the:
•
cardiovascular system
•
gastrointestinal system
hormones and synthetic substitutes
systemic and haematological agents
systemic antibiotics and other anti-infectives
therapeutic gases
topical preparations
vaccines
water-balance agents and drugs affecting mineral and uric acid metabolism
carbon monoxide
lacrimogenic gas [tear gas]
motor (vehicle) exhaust gas
nitrogen oxides
sulfur dioxide
utility gas
metal fumes and vapours (X49.-)
Accidental poisoning by and exposure to pesticides
Includes:
Excludes:
fumigants
fungicides
herbicides
insecticides
rodenticides
wood preservatives
plant foods and fertilizers (X49.-)
935
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
X49
X49
Accidental poisoning by and exposure to other and unspecified chemicals
and noxious substances
Includes:
Excludes:
corrosive aromatics, acids and caustic alkalis
glues and adhesives
metals including fumes and vapours
paints and dyes
plant foods and fertilizers
poisoning NOS
poisonous foodstuffs and poisonous plants
soaps and detergents
contact with venomous animals and plants (X20-X29)
Overexertion, travel and privation
(X50-X57)
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
Excludes:
assault (X85-Y09)
transport accidents (V01-V99)
X50
Overexertion and strenuous or repetitive movements
Includes:
lifting:
•
heavy objects
•
weights
marathon running
rowing
X51 Travel and motion
X52 Prolonged stay in weightless environment
Includes:
X53
Lack of food
Includes:
Excludes:
X54
Excludes:
lack of water as the cause of:
•
dehydration
•
inanition
insufficient intake of water due to self neglect (R63.6)
neglect or abandonment by others (Y06.-)
self neglect NOS (R46.88)
Unspecified privation
Includes:
936
lack of food as the cause of:
•
inanition
•
insufficient nourishment
•
starvation
insufficient intake of food and water due to self neglect (R63.6)
neglect or abandonment by others (Y06.-)
self neglect NOS (R46.88)
Lack of water
Includes:
X57
weightlessness in spacecraft (simulator)
destitution
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Accidental exposure to other and unspecified factors
(X58-X59)
X62
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
X58 Exposure to other specified factors
X59 Exposure to unspecified factor
X59.0 Exposure to unspecified factor causing fracture
X59.9 Exposure to unspecified factor causing other and unspecified injury
     Includes:
    accident NOS
   exposure NOS
Intentional self-harm
(X60-X84)
Includes:
purposely self-inflicted poisoning or injury
suicide (attempted)
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
X60
Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to nonopioid analgesics,
antipyretics and antirheumatics
Includes:
X61
Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to antiepileptic, sedative-
hypnotic, antiparkinsonism and psychotropic drugs, not elsewhere
classified
Includes:
X62
4-aminophenol derivatives
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAID]
pyrazolone derivatives
salicylates
antidepressants
barbiturates
hydantoin derivatives
iminostilbenes
methaqualone compounds
neuroleptics
psychostimulants
succinimides and oxazolidinediones
tranquillizers
Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to narcotics and
psychodysleptics [hallucinogens], not elsewhere classified
Includes:
cannabis (derivatives)
cocaine
codeine
heroin
lysergide [LSD]
mescaline
methadone
morphine
opium (alkaloids)
937
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
X63
X63
Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to other drugs acting on the
autonomic nervous system
Includes:
X64
Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to other and unspecified drugs,
medicaments and biological substances
Includes:
X65
Excludes:
carbon monoxide
lacrimogenic gas [tear gas]
motor (vehicle) exhaust gas
nitrogen oxides
sulfur dioxide
utility gas
metal fumes and vapours (X69.-)
Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to pesticides
Includes:
Excludes:
938
benzene and homologues
carbon tetrachloride [tetrachloromethane]
chlorofluorocarbons
petroleum (derivatives)
Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to other gases and vapours
Includes:
X68
alcohol:
•
NOS
•
butyl [1-butanol]
•
ethyl [ethanol]
•
isopropyl [2-propanol]
•
methyl [methanol]
•
propyl [1-propanol]
fusel oil
Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to organic solvents and
halogenated hydrocarbons and their vapours
Includes:
X67
agents primarily acting on smooth and skeletal muscles and the respiratory system
anaesthetics (general)(local)
drugs affecting the:
•
cardiovascular system
•
gastrointestinal system
hormones and synthetic substitutes
systemic and haematological agents
systemic antibiotics and other anti-infectives
therapeutic gases
topical preparations
vaccines
water-balance agents and drugs affecting mineral and uric acid metabolism
Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to alcohol
Includes:
X66
parasympatholytics [anticholinergics and antimuscarinics] and spasmolytics
parasympathomimetics [cholinergics]
sympatholytics [antiadrenergics]
sympathomimetics [adrenergics]
fumigants
fungicides
herbicides
insecticides
rodenticides
wood preservatives
plant foods and fertilizers (X69.-)
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
X69
Intentional self-poisoning by and exposure to other and unspecified
chemicals and noxious substances
Includes:
X84
corrosive aromatics, acids and caustic alkalis
glues and adhesives
metals including fumes and vapours
paints and dyes
plant foods and fertilizers
poisonous foodstuffs and poisonous plants
soaps and detergents
X70 Intentional self-harm by hanging, strangulation and suffocation
X71 Intentional self-harm by drowning and submersion
X72 Intentional self-harm by handgun discharge
X73 Intentional self-harm by rifle, shotgun and larger firearm discharge
X74 Intentional self-harm by other and unspecified firearm discharge
X74.00o Intentional self-harm by BB gun discharge
X74.01o Intentional self-harm by air gun discharge
X74.08o Intentional self-harm by other specified firearm discharge
X74.09o Intentional self-harm by unspecified firearm discharge
X75 Intentional self-harm by explosive material
X76 Intentional self-harm by smoke, fire and flames
X77 Intentional self-harm by steam, hot vapours and hot objects
X78 Intentional self-harm by sharp object
X79 Intentional self-harm by blunt object
X80 Intentional self-harm by jumping from a high place
Includes:
intentional fall from one level to another
X81 Intentional self-harm by jumping or lying before moving object
X82 Intentional self-harm by crashing of motor vehicle
Includes:
Excludes:
X83
Intentional self-harm by other specified means
Includes:
X84
intentional collision with:
•
motor vehicle
•
train
•
tram (streetcar)
crashing of aircraft (X83.-)
intentional self-harm by:
•
caustic substances, except poisoning
•
crashing of aircraft
•
electrocution
Intentional self-harm by unspecified means
939
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
X85
Assault
(X85-Y09)
Includes:
homicide
injuries inflicted by another person with intent to injure or kill, by any means
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
Excludes:
injuries due to:
•
legal intervention (Y35.-)
•
operations of war (Y36.-)
X85
Assault by drugs, medicaments and biological substances
Includes:
X86
Assault by corrosive substance
Excludes:
X87
homicidal poisoning by (any):
•
biological substance
•
drug
•
medicament
corrosive gas (X88.-)
Assault by pesticides
Includes:
Excludes:
wood preservatives
plant food and fertilizers (X89.-)
X88 Assault by gases and vapours
X89 Assault by other specified chemicals and noxious substances
Includes:
X90
plant food and fertilizers
Assault by unspecified chemical or noxious substance
Includes:
homicidal poisoning NOS
X91 Assault by hanging, strangulation and suffocation
X92 Assault by drowning and submersion
X93 Assault by handgun discharge
X94 Assault by rifle, shotgun and larger firearm discharge
X95 Assault by other and unspecified firearm discharge
X95.00o Assault by BB gun discharge
X95.01o Assault by air gun discharge
X95.08o Assault by other specified firearm discharge
X95.09o Assault by unspecified firearm discharge
X96
Assault by explosive material
Excludes:
X97
Assault by smoke, fire and flames
Includes:
X98
940
incendiary device (X97.-)
arson
cigarettes
incendiary device
Assault by steam, hot vapours and hot objects
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
X99
Assault by sharp object
Includes:
stabbed NOS
Y00 Assault by blunt object
Y01 Assault by pushing from high place
Y02 Assault by pushing or placing victim before moving object
Y03 
Y09
Assault by crashing of motor vehicle
Includes:
Y04
Assault by bodily force
Includes:
Excludes:
Y05
unarmed brawl or fight
assault by:
•
strangulation (X91.-)
•
submersion (X92.-)
•
use of weapon (X93-X95, X99.-, Y00.-)
sexual assault by bodily force (Y05.-)
Sexual assault by bodily force
Includes:
Y06
deliberately hitting or running over with motor vehicle
rape (attempted)
sodomy (attempted)
Neglect and abandonment
Y06.0 By spouse or partner
Y06.1 By parent
Y06.2 By acquaintance or friend
Y06.8 By other specified persons
Y06.9 By unspecified person
Y07
Other maltreatment
Includes:
Excludes:
mental cruelty
physical abuse
sexual abuse
torture
neglect and abandonment (Y06.-)
sexual assault by bodily force (Y05.-)
Y07.0 By spouse or partner
Y07.1 By parent
Y07.2 By acquaintance or friend
Y07.3 By official authorities
Y07.8 By other specified persons
Y07.9 By unspecified person
Y08 Assault by other specified means
Y09 Assault by unspecified means
Includes:
assassination (attempt) NOS
homicide
manslaughter (nonaccidental)
murder
941
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Y10
Event of undetermined intent
(Y10-Y34)
Note:
This section covers events where available information is insufficient to enable a medical or legal authority to
make a distinction between accident, self-harm and assault. It includes self-inflicted injuries, but not poisoning,
when not specified whether accidental or with intent to harm (X40-X49). Follow legal rulings when available.
Use additional code from category U98.- to identify place of occurrence.
Y10
Poisoning by and exposure to nonopioid analgesics, antipyretics and
antirheumatics, undetermined intent
Includes:
Y11
Poisoning by and exposure to antiepileptic, sedative-hypnotic,
antiparkinsonism and psychotropic drugs, not elsewhere classified,
undetermined intent
Includes:
Y12
cannabis (derivatives)
cocaine
codeine
heroin
lysergide [LSD]
mescaline
methadone
morphine
opium (alkaloids)
Poisoning by and exposure to other drugs acting on the autonomic nervous
system, undetermined intent
Includes:
942
antidepressants
barbiturates
hydantoin derivatives
iminostilbenes
methaqualone compounds
neuroleptics
psychostimulants
succinimides and oxazolidinediones
tranquillizers
Poisoning by and exposure to narcotics and psychodysleptics
[hallucinogens], not elsewhere classified, undetermined intent
Includes:
Y13
4-aminophenol derivatives
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAID]
pyrazolone derivatives
salicylates
parasympatholytics [anticholinergics and antimuscarinics] and spasmolytics
parasympathomimetics [cholinergics]
sympatholytics [antiadrenergics]
sympathomimetics [adrenergics]
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Y14
Poisoning by and exposure to other and unspecified drugs, medicaments
and biological substances, undetermined intent
Includes:
Y15
Poisoning by and exposure to alcohol, undetermined intent
Includes:
Y16
benzene and homologues
carbon tetrachloride [tetrachloromethane]
chlorofluorocarbons
petroleum (derivatives)
Poisoning by and exposure to other gases and vapours, undetermined intent
Includes:
Excludes:
Y18
alcohol:
•
NOS
•
butyl [1-butanol]
•
ethyl [ethanol]
•
isopropyl [2-propanol]
•
methyl [methanol]
•
propyl [1-propanol]
fusel oil
Poisoning by and exposure to organic solvents and halogenated
hydrocarbons and their vapours, undetermined intent
Includes:
Y17
Y18
agents primarily acting on smooth and skeletal muscles and the respiratory system
anaesthetics (general)(local)
drugs affecting the:
•
cardiovascular system
•
gastrointestinal system
hormones and synthetic substitutes
systemic and haematological agents
systemic antibiotics and other anti-infectives
therapeutic gases
topical preparations
vaccines
water-balance agents and drugs affecting mineral and uric acid metabolism
carbon monoxide
lacrimogenic gas [tear gas]
motor (vehicle) exhaust gas
nitrogen oxides
sulfur dioxide
utility gas
metal fumes and vapours (Y19.-)
Poisoning by and exposure to pesticides, undetermined intent
Includes:
Excludes:
fumigants
fungicides
herbicides
insecticides
rodenticides
wood preservatives
plant foods and fertilizers (Y19.-)
943
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Y19
Y19
Poisoning by and exposure to other and unspecified chemicals and noxious
substances, undetermined intent
Includes:
corrosive aromatics, acids and caustic alkalis
glues and adhesives
metals including fumes and vapours
paints and dyes
plant foods and fertilizers
poisonous foodstuffs and poisonous plants
soaps and detergents
Y20 Hanging, strangulation and suffocation, undetermined intent
Y21 Drowning and submersion, undetermined intent
Y22 Handgun discharge, undetermined intent
Y23 Rifle, shotgun and larger firearm discharge, undetermined intent
Y24 Other and unspecified firearm discharge, undetermined intent
Y24.00o BB gun discharge, undetermined intent
Y24.01o Air gun discharge, undetermined intent
Y24.08o Other specified firearm discharge, undetermined intent
Y24.09o Unspecified firearm discharge, undetermined intent
Y25 Contact with explosive material, undetermined intent
Y26 Exposure to smoke, fire and flames, undetermined intent
Y27 Contact with steam, hot vapours and hot objects, undetermined intent
Y28 Contact with sharp object, undetermined intent
Y29 Contact with blunt object, undetermined intent
Y30 Falling, jumping or pushed from a high place, undetermined intent
Includes:
Victim falling from one level to another, undetermined intent
Y31 Falling, lying or running before or into moving object, undetermined intent
Y32 Crashing of motor vehicle, undetermined intent
Y33 Other specified events, undetermined intent
Y34 Unspecified event, undetermined intent
944
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Legal intervention and operations of war
(Y35-Y36)
Y35
Y35.7
Legal intervention
Includes:
injuries inflicted by the police or other law-enforcing agents, including military on duty, in the
course of arresting or attempting to arrest lawbreakers, suppressing disturbances, maintaining
order, and other legal action.
Y35.0 Legal intervention involving firearm discharge
     Includes:
    Legal intervention with:
   •
    machine gun
   •
    revolver
   •
    rifle pellet or rubber bullet
Y35.1 Legal intervention involving explosives
     Includes:
    Legal intervention with:
   •
    dynamite
   •
    explosive shell
   •
    grenade
   •
    mortar bomb
Y35.2 Legal intervention involving gas
     Includes:
    Asphyxiation by gas
   Injury by tear gas
  Poisoning by gas
due to legal intervention
Y35.3 Legal intervention involving blunt objects
     Includes:
    Hit, struck by:
   •
    baton
   •
    blunt object
   during legal intervention
  •
   stave
Y35.4 Legal intervention involving sharp objects
     Includes:
    Cut
   Injured by bayonet
  during legal intervention
 Stabbed
Y35.5 Legal execution
     Includes:
    Any execution performed at the behest of the judiciary or ruling authority [whether permanent
   or temporary], such as:
  •
   asphyxiation by gas
  •
   beheading, decapitation (by guillotine)
  •
   capital punishment
  •
   electrocution
  •
   hanging
  •
   poisoning
  •
   shooting
Y35.6 Legal intervention involving other specified means
     Includes:
    Manhandling
Y35.7 Legal intervention, means unspecified
945
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Y36
Operations of war
Note:
Includes:
Y36
Injuries due to operations of war occurring after cessation of hostilities are classified to Y36.8.
injuries to military personnel and civilians caused by war and civil insurrection
Y36.0 War operations involving explosion of marine weapons
     Includes:
    Depth-charge
   Marine mine
  Mine NOS, at sea or in harbour
 Sea-based artillery shell
Torpedo
Underwater blast
Y36.1 War operations involving destruction of aircraft
     Includes:
    Aircraft:
   •
    burned
   •
    exploded
   •
    shot down
   Crushed by falling aircraft
Y36.2 War operations involving other explosions and fragments
     Includes:
    Accidental explosion of:
   Explosion (of):
  •
   artillery shell
  •
   breech-block
  •
   cannon block
  •
   mortar bomb
  Fragments from:
 •
  artillery shell
 •
  bomb
 •
  grenade
 •
  guided missile
 during war operations
•
 land-mine
•
 rocket
•
 shell
•
 shrapnel
•
 munitions being used
in war
•
 own weapons
Antipersonnel bomb
(fragments)
Mine NOS
Y36.3 War operations involving fires, conflagrations and hot substances
     Includes:
    Asphyxia
   originating from fire caused directly by a fire-producing device or
  Burns
 indirectly by any conventional weapon
Other injury
Petrol bomb
Y36.4
946
War operations involving firearm discharge and other forms of conventional warfare
Includes:
Battle wounds
Bayonet injury
Bullet:
•
carbine
•
machine gun
•
pistol
•
rifle
•
rubber (rifle)
Drowned in war operations NOS
Pellets (shotgun)
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Y36.5
War operations involving nuclear weapons
Includes:
Blast effects
Exposure to ionizing radiation from nuclear weapon
Fireball effects
Heat
Other direct and secondary effects of nuclear weapons
Y36.6 War operations involving biological weapons
Y36.7 War operations involving chemical weapons and other forms of unconventional warfare
     Includes:
    Gases, fumes and chemicals
   Lasers
Y36.8 War operations occurring after cessation of hostilities
     Includes:
    Injuries by explosion of bombs or mines placed in the course of operations of war, if the
   explosion occurred after cessation of hostilities
  Injuries due to operations of war and classifiable to (Y36.0-Y36.7) or (Y36.9) but occurring after
 cessation of hostilities
Y36.9 
Y40.9
War operations, unspecified
Complications of medical and surgical care
(Y40-Y84)
Includes:
Excludes:
complications of medical devices
correct drug properly administered in therapeutic or prophylactic dosage as the cause of any adverse effect
misadventures to patients during surgical and medical care
surgical and medical procedures as the cause of abnormal reaction of the patient, or of later complication,
without mention of misadventure at the time of the procedure
accidental overdose of drug or wrong drug given or taken in error (X40-X44)
Drugs, medicaments and biological substances causing adverse
effects in therapeutic use
(Y40-Y59)
Note:
Excludes:
Y40
For list of specific drugs classified under the fourth-character subdivisions, see Table of drugs and chemicals in
Alphabetical Index.
accidents in the technique of administration of drugs, medicaments and biological substances in medical and
surgical procedures (Y60-Y69)
Systemic antibiotics
Excludes:
antibiotics, topically used (Y56.-)
antineoplastic antibiotics (Y43.3)
Y40.0 Penicillins
Y40.1 Cefalosporins and other ß-lactam antibiotics
Y40.2 Chloramphenicol group
Y40.3 Macrolides
Y40.4 Tetracyclines
Y40.5 Aminoglycosides
     Includes:
    Streptomycin
Y40.6 Rifamycins
Y40.7 Antifungal antibiotics, systemically used
Y40.8 Other systemic antibiotics
Y40.9 Systemic antibiotic, unspecified
947
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Y41
Other systemic anti-infectives and antiparasitics
Excludes:
Y41
anti-infectives, topically used (Y56.-)
Y41.0 Sulfonamides
Y41.1 Antimycobacterial drugs
     Excludes:
    rifamycins (Y40.6)
   streptomycin (Y40.5)
Y41.2 Antimalarials and drugs acting on other blood protozoa
     Excludes:
    hydroxyquinoline derivatives (Y41.8)
Y41.3 Other antiprotozoal drugs
Y41.4 Anthelminthics
Y41.5 Antiviral drugs
     Excludes:
    amantadine (Y46.7)
   cytarabine (Y43.1)
Y41.8 Other specified systemic anti-infectives and antiparasitics
     Includes:
    Hydroxyquinoline derivatives
   Excludes:
  antimalarial drugs (Y41.2)
Y41.9 Systemic anti-infective and antiparasitic, unspecified
Y42
Hormones and their synthetic substitutes and antagonists, not elsewhere
classified
Excludes:
mineralocorticoids and their antagonists (Y54.0-Y54.1)
oxytocic hormones (Y55.0)
parathyroid hormones and derivatives (Y54.7)
Y42.0 Glucocorticoids and synthetic analogues
     Excludes:
    glucocorticoids, topically used (Y56.-)
Y42.1 Thyroid hormones and substitutes
Y42.2 Antithyroid drugs
Y42.3 Insulin and oral hypoglycaemic [antidiabetic] drugs
Y42.4 Oral contraceptives
     Includes:
    Multiple- and single-ingredient preparations
Y42.5 Other estrogens and progestogens
     Includes:
    Mixtures and substitutes
Y42.6 Antigonadotrophins, antiestrogens, antiandrogens, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Tamoxifen
Y42.7 Androgens and anabolic congeners
Y42.8 Other and unspecified hormones and their synthetic substitutes
     Includes:
    Anterior pituitary [adenohypophyseal] hormones
Y42.9 Other and unspecified hormone antagonists
Y43
Primarily systemic agents
Excludes:
vitamins NEC (Y57.7)
Y43.0 Antiallergic and antiemetic drugs
     Excludes:
    phenothiazine-based neuroleptics (Y49.3)
Y43.1 Antineoplastic antimetabolites
     Includes:
    Cytarabine
Y43.2 Antineoplastic natural products
948
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Y43.3
Other antineoplastic drugs
Includes:
Antineoplastic antibiotics
Excludes:
tamoxifen (Y42.6)
Y43.4 Immunosuppressive agents
Y43.5 Acidifying and alkalizing agents
Y43.6 Enzymes, not elsewhere classified
Y43.8 Other primarily systemic agents, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Heavy-metal antagonists
Y43.9 
Y46.3
Primarily systemic agent, unspecified
Y44
Agents primarily affecting blood constituents
Y44.0 Iron preparations and other anti-hypochromic-anaemia preparations
Y44.1 Vitamin B12, folic acid and other anti-megaloblastic-anaemia preparations
Y44.2 Anticoagulants
Y44.3 Anticoagulant antagonists, vitamin K and other coagulants
Y44.4 Antithrombotic drugs [platelet-aggregation inhibitors]
     Excludes:
    acetylsalicylic acid (Y45.1)
   dipyridamole (Y52.3)
Y44.5 Thrombolytic drugs
Y44.6 Natural blood and blood products
     Excludes:
    immunoglobulin (Y59.3)
Y44.7 Plasma substitutes
Y44.9 Other and unspecified agents affecting blood constituents
Y45
Analgesics, antipyretics and anti-inflammatory drugs
Y45.0 Opioids and related analgesics
Y45.1 Salicylates
Y45.2 Propionic acid derivatives
     Includes:
    Propanoic acid derivatives
Y45.3 Other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAID]
Y45.4 Antirheumatics
     Excludes:
    chloroquine (Y41.2)
   glucocorticoids (Y42.0)
  salicylates (Y45.1)
Y45.5 4-Aminophenol derivatives
Y45.8 Other analgesics and antipyretics
Y45.9 Analgesic, antipyretic and anti-inflammatory drug, unspecified
Y46
Antiepileptics and antiparkinsonism drugs
Excludes:
acetazolamide (Y54.2)
barbiturates NEC (Y47.0)
benzodiazepines (Y47.1)
paraldehyde (Y47.3)
Y46.0 Succinimides
Y46.1 Oxazolidinediones
Y46.2 Hydantoin derivatives
Y46.3 Deoxybarbiturates
949
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Y46.4 
Y46.4
Iminostilbenes
Includes:
Carbamazepine
Y46.5 Valproic acid
Y46.6 Other and unspecified antiepileptics
Y46.7 Antiparkinsonism drugs
     Includes:
    Amantadine
Y46.8 Antispasticity drugs
     Excludes:
    benzodiazepines (Y47.1)
Y47
Sedatives, hypnotics and antianxiety drugs
Y47.0 Barbiturates, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    deoxybarbiturates (Y46.3)
   thiobarbiturates (Y48.1)
Y47.1 Benzodiazepines
Y47.2 Cloral derivatives
Y47.3 Paraldehyde
Y47.4 Bromine compounds
Y47.5 Mixed sedatives and hypnotics, not elsewhere classified
Y47.8 Other sedatives, hypnotics and antianxiety drugs
     Includes:
    Methaqualone
Y47.9 Sedative, hypnotic and antianxiety drug, unspecified
     Includes:
    Sleeping:
   •
    draught NOS
   •
    drug NOS
   •
    tablet NOS
Y48
Anaesthetics and therapeutic gases
Y48.0 Inhaled anaesthetics
Y48.1 Parenteral anaesthetics
     Includes:
    Thiobarbiturates
Y48.2 Other and unspecified general anaesthetics
Y48.3 Local anaesthetics
Y48.4 Anaesthetic, unspecified
Y48.5 Therapeutic gases
Y49
Psychotropic drugs, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
appetite depressants [anorectics] (Y57.0)
barbiturates NEC (Y47.0)
benzodiazepines (Y47.1)
caffeine (Y50.2)
cocaine (Y48.3)
methaqualone (Y47.8)
Y49.0 Tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressants
Y49.1 Monoamine-oxidase-inhibitor antidepressants
Y49.2 Other and unspecified antidepressants
Y49.3 Phenothiazine antipsychotics and neuroleptics
Y49.4 Butyrophenone and thioxanthene neuroleptics
950
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Y49.5 Other antipsychotics and neuroleptics
     Excludes:
    rauwolfia (Y52.5)
Y49.6 Psychodysleptics [hallucinogens]
Y49.7 Psychostimulants with abuse potential
Y49.8 Other psychotropic drugs, not elsewhere classified
Y49.9 Psychotropic drug, unspecified
Y50
Y52.3
Central nervous system stimulants, not elsewhere classified
Y50.0 Analeptics
Y50.1 Opioid receptor antagonists
Y50.2 Methylxanthines, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Caffeine
   Excludes:
  aminophylline (Y55.6)
 theobromine (Y55.6)
theophylline (Y55.6)
Y50.8 Other central nervous system stimulants
Y50.9 Central nervous system stimulant, unspecified
Y51
Drugs primarily affecting the autonomic nervous system
Y51.0 Anticholinesterase agents
Y51.1 Other parasympathomimetics [cholinergics]
Y51.2 Ganglionic blocking drugs, not elsewhere classified
Y51.3 Other parasympatholytics [anticholinergics and antimuscarinics] and spasmolytics, not
     elsewhere classified
    Includes:
   Papaverine
Y51.4 Predominantly a-adrenoreceptor agonists, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Metaraminol
Y51.5 Predominantly ß-adrenoreceptor agonists, not elsewhere classified
      Excludes:
     salbutamol (Y55.6)
Y51.6 a-Adrenoreceptor antagonists, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    ergot alkaloids (Y55.0)
Y51.7 ß-Adrenoreceptor antagonists, not elsewhere classified
Y51.8 Centrally acting and adrenergic-neuron-blocking agents, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    clonidine (Y52.5)
   guanethidine (Y52.5)
Y51.9 Other and unspecified drugs primarily affecting the autonomic nervous system
     Includes:
    Drugs stimulating both α- and β-adrenoreceptors
Y52
Agents primarily affecting the cardiovascular system
Excludes:
metaraminol (Y51.4)
Y52.0 Cardiac-stimulant glycosides and drugs of similar action
Y52.1 Calcium-channel blockers
Y52.2 Other antidysrhythmic drugs, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    β-adrenoreceptor antagonists (Y51.7)
Y52.3 Coronary vasodilators, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Dipyridamole
   Excludes:
  β-adrenoreceptor antagonists (Y51.7)
  calcium-channel blockers (Y52.1)
951
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Y52.4 
Y52.4
Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors
Y52.5 Other antihypertensive drugs, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Clonidine
   Guanethidine
  Rauwolfia
 Excludes:
β-adrenoreceptor antagonists (Y51.7)
calcium-channel blockers (Y52.1)
diuretics (Y54.0-Y54.5)
Y52.6 Antihyperlipidaemic and antiarteriosclerotic drugs
Y52.7 Peripheral vasodilators
     Includes:
    Nicotinic acid (derivatives)
   Excludes:
  papaverine (Y51.3)
Y52.8 Antivaricose drugs, including sclerosing agents
Y52.9 Other and unspecified agents primarily affecting the cardiovascular system
Y53
Agents primarily affecting the gastrointestinal system
Y53.0 Histamine H2-receptor antagonists
Y53.1 Other antacids and anti-gastric-secretion drugs
Y53.2 Stimulant laxatives
Y53.3 Saline and osmotic laxatives
Y53.4 Other laxatives
     Includes:
    Intestinal atonia drugs
Y53.5 Digestants
Y53.6 Antidiarrhoeal drugs
     Excludes:
    systemic antibiotics and other anti-infectives (Y40-Y41)
Y53.7 Emetics
Y53.8 Other agents primarily affecting the gastrointestinal system
Y53.9 Agent primarily affecting the gastrointestinal system, unspecified
Y54
Agents primarily affecting water-balance and mineral and uric acid
metabolism
Y54.0 Mineralocorticoids
Y54.1 Mineralocorticoid antagonists [aldosterone antagonists]
Y54.2 Carbonic-anhydrase inhibitors
     Includes:
    Acetazolamide
Y54.3 Benzothiadiazine derivatives
Y54.4 Loop [high-ceiling] diuretics
Y54.5 Other diuretics
Y54.6 Electrolytic, caloric and water-balance agents
     Includes:
    Oral rehydration salts
Y54.7 Agents affecting calcification
     Includes:
    Parathyroid hormones and derivatives
   Vitamin D group
Y54.8 Agents affecting uric acid metabolism
Y54.9 Mineral salts, not elsewhere classified
952
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Y55
Agents primarily acting on smooth and skeletal muscles and the respiratory
system
Y55.0 Y55.1 Skeletal muscle relaxants [neuromuscular blocking agents]
           Excludes:
          antispasticity drugs (Y46.8)
Y55.2 Other and unspecified agents primarily acting on muscles
Y55.3 Antitussives
Y55.4 Expectorants
Y55.5 Anti-common-cold drugs
Y55.6 Antiasthmatics, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Aminophylline
   Salbutamol
  Theobromine
 Theophylline
Excludes:
β-adrenoreceptor agonists (Y51.5)
anterior pituitary [adenohypophyseal] hormones (Y42.8)
Y55.7 
Y57.6
Oxytocic drugs
Includes:
Ergot alkaloids
Excludes:
estrogens, progestogens and antagonists (Y42.5-Y42.6)
Other and unspecified agents primarily acting on the respiratory system
Y56
Topical agents primarily affecting skin and mucous membrane and
ophthalmological, otorhinolaryngological and dental drugs
Includes:
glucocorticoids, topically used
Y56.0 Local antifungal, anti-infective and anti-inflammatory drugs, not elsewhere classified
Y56.1 Antipruritics
Y56.2 Local astringents and local detergents
Y56.3 Emollients, demulcents and protectants
Y56.4 Keratolytics, keratoplastics and other hair treatment drugs and preparations
Y56.5 Ophthalmological drugs and preparations
Y56.6 Otorhinolaryngological drugs and preparations
Y56.7 Dental drugs, topically applied
Y56.8 Other topical agents
     Includes:
    Spermicides
Y56.9 Topical agent, unspecified
Y57
Other and unspecified drugs and medicaments
Y57.0 Appetite depressants [anorectics]
Y57.1 Lipotropic drugs
Y57.2 Antidotes and chelating agents, not elsewhere classified
Y57.3 Alcohol deterrents
Y57.4 Pharmaceutical excipients
Y57.5 Xray contrast media
Y57.6 Other diagnostic agents
953
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Y57.7 Vitamins, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    nicotinic acid (Y52.7)
   vitamin:
  •
   B 12 (Y44.1)
  •
   D (Y54.7)
  •
   K (Y44.3)
Y57.8 Other drugs and medicaments
Y57.9 Drug or medicament, unspecified
Y57.7
Y58
Bacterial vaccines
Y58.0 BCG vaccine
Y58.1 Typhoid and paratyphoid vaccine
Y58.2 Cholera vaccine
Y58.3 Plague vaccine
Y58.4 Tetanus vaccine
Y58.5 Diphtheria vaccine
Y58.6 Pertussis vaccine, including combinations with a pertussis component
Y58.8 Mixed bacterial vaccines, except combinations with a pertussis component
Y58.9 Other and unspecified bacterial vaccines
Y59
Other and unspecified vaccines and biological substances
Y59.0 Viral vaccines
Y59.1 Rickettsial vaccines
Y59.2 Protozoal vaccines
Y59.3 Immunoglobulin
Y59.8 Other specified vaccines and biological substances
Y59.9 Vaccine or biological substance, unspecified
Misadventures to patients during surgical and medical care
(Y60-Y69)
Excludes: breakdown or malfunctioning of medical device (during procedure) (after implantation) (ongoing use) (Y70-
         Y82)
        surgical and medical procedures as the cause of abnormal reaction of the patient, without mention of
       misadventure at the time of the procedure (Y83-Y84)
Y60 Unintentional cut, puncture, perforation or haemorrhage during surgical and
   medical care
Y60.0 During surgical operation
Y60.1 During infusion or transfusion
Y60.2 During kidney dialysis or other perfusion
Y60.3 During injection or immunization
Y60.4 During endoscopic examination
Y60.5 During heart catheterization
Y60.6 During aspiration, puncture and other catheterization
Y60.7 During administration of enema
Y60.8 During other surgical and medical care
954
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Y60.9
Y61
During unspecified surgical and medical care
Foreign object accidentally left in body during surgical and medical care
Y61.0 During surgical operation
Y61.1 During infusion or transfusion
Y61.2 During kidney dialysis or other perfusion
Y61.3 During injection or immunization
Y61.4 During endoscopic examination
Y61.5 During heart catheterization
Y61.6 During aspiration, puncture and other catheterization
Y61.7 During removal of catheter or packing
Y61.8 During other surgical and medical care
Y61.9 
Y64.9
During unspecified surgical and medical care
Y62
Failure of sterile precautions during surgical and medical care
Y62.0 During surgical operation
Y62.1 During infusion or transfusion
Y62.2 During kidney dialysis or other perfusion
Y62.3 During injection or immunization
Y62.4 During endoscopic examination
Y62.5 During heart catheterization
Y62.6 During aspiration, puncture and other catheterization
Y62.8 During other surgical and medical care
Y62.9 During unspecified surgical and medical care
Y63
Failure in dosage during surgical and medical care
Excludes:
accidental overdose of drug or wrong drug given in error (X40-X44)
Y63.0 Excessive amount of blood or other fluid given during transfusion or infusion
Y63.1 Incorrect dilution of fluid used during infusion
Y63.2 Overdose of radiation given during therapy
Y63.3 Inadvertent exposure of patient to radiation during medical care
Y63.4 Failure in dosage in electroshock or insulin-shock therapy
Y63.5 Inappropriate temperature in local application and packing
Y63.6 Nonadministration of necessary drug, medicament or biological substance
Y63.8 Failure in dosage during other surgical and medical care
Y63.9 Failure in dosage during unspecified surgical and medical care
Y64
Contaminated medical or biological substances
Y64.0 Contaminated medical or biological substance, transfused or infused
Y64.1 Contaminated medical or biological substance, injected or used for immunization
Y64.8 Contaminated medical or biological substance administered by other means
Y64.9 Contaminated medical or biological substance administered by unspecified means
     Includes:
    Administered contaminated medical or biological substance NOS
955
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Y65
Y65
Other misadventures during surgical and medical care
Y65.0 Mismatched blood used in transfusion
Y65.1 Wrong fluid used in infusion
Y65.2 Failure in suture or ligature during surgical operation
Y65.3 Endotracheal tube wrongly placed during anaesthetic procedure
Y65.4 Failure to introduce or to remove other tube or instrument
Y65.5 Performance of inappropriate operation
Y65.8 Other specified misadventures during surgical and medical care
Y66
Nonadministration of surgical and medical care
Includes:
Y69
Premature cessation of surgical and medical care
Unspecified misadventure during surgical and medical care
Medical devices associated with adverse incidents in diagnostic and
therapeutic use
(Y70-Y82)
Includes:
Excludes:
Y70
breakdown or malfunctioning of medical device (during procedure) (after implantation) (ongoing use)
later complications following use of medical devices without mention of breakdown or malfunctioning of
medical device (Y83 -Y84)
misadventures to patients during surgical and medical care, classifiable to (Y60 -Y69)
Anaesthesiology devices associated with adverse incidents
Y70.0 Anaesthesiology devices associated with adverse incidents, diagnostic and monitoring
     devices
Y70.1 Anaesthesiology devices associated with adverse incidents, therapeutic (nonsurgical) and
     rehabilitative devices
Y70.2 Anaesthesiology devices associated with adverse incidents, prosthetic and other implants,
     materials and accessory devices
Y70.3 Anaesthesiology devices associated with adverse incidents, surgical instruments, materials
     and devices (including sutures)
Y70.8 Anaesthesiology devices associated with adverse incidents, miscellaneous devices, not
     elsewhere classified
Y71
Cardiovascular devices associated with adverse incidents
Y71.0 Cardiovascular devices associated with adverse incidents, diagnostic and monitoring devices
Y71.1 Cardiovascular devices associated with adverse incidents, therapeutic (nonsurgical) and
     rehabilitative devices
Y71.2 Cardiovascular devices associated with adverse incidents, prosthetic and other implants,
     materials and accessory devices
Y71.3 Cardiovascular devices associated with adverse incidents, surgical instruments, materials
     and devices (including sutures)
Y71.8 Cardiovascular devices associated with adverse incidents, miscellaneous devices, not
     elsewhere classified
956
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Y72
Otorhinolaryngological devices associated with adverse incidents
Y72.0 Y72.1 Otorhinolaryngological devices associated with adverse incidents, therapeutic (nonsurgical)
           and rehabilitative devices
Y72.2 Otorhinolaryngological devices associated with adverse incidents, prosthetic and other
     implants, materials and accessory devices
Y72.3 Otorhinolaryngological devices associated with adverse incidents, surgical instruments,
     materials and devices (including sutures)
Y72.8 
Y75.8
Otorhinolaryngological devices associated with adverse incidents, diagnostic and monitoring
devices
Otorhinolaryngological devices associated with adverse incidents, miscellaneous devices,
not elsewhere classified
Y73
Gastroenterology and urology devices associated with adverse incidents
Y73.0 Gastroenterology and urology devices associated with adverse incidents, diagnostic and
     monitoring devices
Y73.1 Gastroenterology and urology devices associated with adverse incidents, therapeutic
     (nonsurgical) and rehabilitative devices
Y73.2 Gastroenterology and urology devices associated with adverse incidents, prosthetic and
     other implants, materials and accessory devices
Y73.3 Gastroenterology and urology devices associated with adverse incidents, surgical
     instruments, materials and devices (including sutures)
Y73.8 Gastroenterology and urology devices associated with adverse incidents, miscellaneous
     devices, not elsewhere classified
Y74
General hospital and personal-use devices associated with adverse
incidents
Y74.0 General hospital and personal-use devices associated with adverse incidents, diagnostic and
     monitoring devices
Y74.1 General hospital and personal-use devices associated with adverse incidents, therapeutic
     (non-surgical) and rehabilitative devices
Y74.2 General hospital and personal-use devices associated with adverse incidents, prosthetic and
     other implants, materials and accessory devices
Y74.3 General hospital and personal-use devices associated with adverse incidents, surgical
     instruments, materials and devices (including sutures)
Y74.8 General hospital and personal-use devices associated with adverse incidents, miscellaneous
     devices, not elsewhere classified
Y75
Neurological devices associated with adverse incidents
Y75.0 Neurological devices associated with adverse incidents, diagnostic and monitoring devices
Y75.1 Neurological devices associated with adverse incidents, therapeutic (nonsurgical) and
     rehabilitative devices
Y75.2 Neurological devices associated with adverse incidents, prosthetic and other implants,
     materials and accessory devices
Y75.3 Neurological devices associated with adverse incidents, surgical instruments, materials and
     devices (including sutures)
Y75.8 Neurological devices associated with adverse incidents, miscellaneous devices, not
     elsewhere classified
957
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Y76
Y76
Obstetric and gynaecological devices associated with adverse incidents
Y76.0 Obstetric and gynaecological devices associated with adverse incidents, diagnostic and
     monitoring devices
Y76.1 Obstetric and gynaecological devices associated with adverse incidents, therapeutic
     (nonsurgical) and rehabilitative devices
Y76.2 Obstetric and gynaecological devices associated with adverse incidents, prosthetic and other
     implants, materials and accessory devices
Y76.3 Obstetric and gynaecological devices associated with adverse incidents, surgical
     instruments, materials and devices (including sutures)
Y76.8 Obstetric and gynaecological devices associated with adverse incidents, miscellaneous
     devices, not elsewhere classified
Y77
Ophthalmic devices associated with adverse incidents
Y77.0 Ophthalmic devices associated with adverse incidents, diagnostic and monitoring devices
Y77.1 Ophthalmic devices associated with adverse incidents, therapeutic (nonsurgical) and
     rehabilitative devices
Y77.2 Ophthalmic devices associated with adverse incidents, prosthetic and other implants,
     materials and accessory devices
Y77.3 Ophthalmic devices associated with adverse incidents, surgical instruments, materials and
     devices (including sutures)
Y77.8 Ophthalmic devices associated with adverse incidents, miscellaneous devices, not elsewhere
     classified
Y78
Radiological devices associated with adverse incidents
Y78.0 Radiological devices associated with adverse incidents, diagnostic and monitoring devices
Y78.1 Radiological devices associated with adverse incidents, therapeutic (nonsurgical) and
     rehabilitative devices
Y78.2 Radiological devices associated with adverse incidents, prosthetic and other implants,
     materials and accessory devices
Y78.3 Radiological devices associated with adverse incidents, surgical instruments, materials and
     devices (including sutures)
Y78.8 Radiological devices associated with adverse incidents, miscellaneous devices, not
     elsewhere classified
Y79
Orthopaedic devices associated with adverse incidents
Y79.0 Orthopaedic devices associated with adverse incidents, diagnostic and monitoring devices
Y79.1 Orthopaedic devices associated with adverse incidents, therapeutic (nonsurgical) and
     rehabilitative devices
Y79.2 Orthopaedic devices associated with adverse incidents, prosthetic and other implants,
     materials and accessory devices
Y79.3 Orthopaedic devices associated with adverse incidents, surgical instruments, materials and
     devices (including sutures)
Y79.8 Orthopaedic devices associated with adverse incidents, miscellaneous devices, not
     elsewhere classified
958
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Y80
Physical medicine devices associated with adverse incidents
Y80.0 Y80.1 Physical medicine devices associated with adverse incidents, therapeutic (nonsurgical) and
           rehabilitative devices
Y80.2 Physical medicine devices associated with adverse incidents, prosthetic and other implants,
     materials and accessory devices
Y80.3 Physical medicine devices associated with adverse incidents, surgical instruments, materials
     and devices (including sutures)
Y80.8 
Y82.8
Physical medicine devices associated with adverse incidents, diagnostic and monitoring
devices
Physical medicine devices associated with adverse incidents, miscellaneous devices, not
elsewhere classified
Y81 General- and plastic-surgery devices associated with adverse incidents
Y81.0 General- and plastic-surgery devices associated with adverse incidents, diagnostic and
     monitoring devices
Y81.1 General- and plastic-surgery devices associated with adverse incidents, therapeutic
     (nonsurgical) and rehabilitative devices
Y81.2 General- and plastic-surgery devices associated with adverse incidents, prosthetic and other
     implants, materials and accessory devices
Y81.3 General- and plastic-surgery devices associated with adverse incidents, surgical instruments,
     materials and devices (including sutures)
Y81.8 General- and plastic-surgery devices associated with adverse incidents, miscellaneous
     devices, not elsewhere classified
Y82
Other and unspecified medical devices associated with adverse incidents
Y82.0 Other and unspecified medical devices associated with adverse incidents, diagnostic and
     monitoring devices
Y82.1 Other and unspecified medical devices associated with adverse incidents, therapeutic
     (nonsurgical) and rehabilitative devices
Y82.2 Other and unspecified medical devices associated with adverse incidents, prosthetic and
     other implants, materials and accessory devices
Y82.3 Other and unspecified medical devices associated with adverse incidents, surgical
     instruments, materials and devices (including sutures)
Y82.8 Other and unspecified medical devices associated with adverse incidents, miscellaneous
     devices, not elsewhere classified
959
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Y83
Surgical and other medical procedures as the cause of abnormal
reaction of the patient, or of later complication, without mention of
misadventure at the time of the procedure
(Y83-Y84)
Excludes: breakdown or malfunctioning of medical device (during procedure) (after implantation) (ongoing use) (Y70-
         Y82)
        misadventures to patients during surgical and medical care, classifiable to (Y60- Y69)
Y83 Surgical operation and other surgical procedures as the cause of abnormal
   reaction of the patient, or of later complication, without mention of
  misadventure at the time of the procedure
Y83.0 Surgical operation with transplant of whole organ or tissue
Y83.1 Surgical operation with implant of artificial internal device
Y83.2 Surgical operation with anastomosis, bypass or graft
Y83.3 Surgical operation with formation of external stoma
Y83.4 Other reconstructive surgery
Y83.5 Amputation of limb(s)
Y83.6 Removal of other organ (partial) (total)
Y83.8 Other surgical procedures
Y83.9 Surgical procedure, unspecified
Y84
Other medical procedures as the cause of abnormal reaction of the patient,
or of later complication, without mention of misadventure at the time of the
procedure
Y84.0 Cardiac catheterization
Y84.1 Kidney dialysis
Y84.2 Radiological procedure and radiotherapy
Y84.3 Shock therapy
Y84.30o Electroconvulsive therapy
       Includes:
      ECT for psychiatric treatment
Y84.38o Other shock therapy
       Includes:
      Extracorporeal shock therapy
Y84.4 Aspiration of fluid
Y84.5 Insertion of gastric or duodenal sound
Y84.6 Urinary catheterization
Y84.7 Blood-sampling
Y84.8 Other medical procedures
Y84.9 Medical procedure, unspecified
960
EXTERNAL CAUSES OF MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY (V01-Y98)
Sequelae of external causes of morbidity and mortality
(Y85-Y89)
Note:
Y85
Y89.9
Categories Y85-Y89 are to be used to indicate circumstances as the cause of death, impairment or disability
from sequelae or "late effects", which are themselves classified elsewhere. The sequelae include conditions
reported as such, or occurring as "late effects" one year or more after the originating event.
Not to be used for chronic poisoning and harmful exposure. Code these to current poisoning and harmful
exposure.
Sequelae of transport accidents
Y85.0 Sequelae of motor-vehicle accident
Y85.9 Sequelae of other and unspecified transport accidents
Y86 Sequelae of other accidents
Y87 Sequelae of intentional self-harm, assault and events of undetermined intent
Y87.0 Sequelae of intentional self-harm
Y87.1 Sequelae of assault
Y87.2 Sequelae of events of undetermined intent
Y88
Sequelae with surgical and medical care as external cause
Y88.0 Sequelae of adverse effects caused by drugs, medicaments and biological substances in
     therapeutic use
Y88.1 Sequelae of misadventures to patients during surgical and medical procedures
Y88.2 Sequelae of adverse incidents associated with medical devices in diagnostic and therapeutic
     use
Y88.3 Sequelae of surgical and medical procedures as the cause of abnormal reaction of the patient,
     or of later complication, without mention of misadventure at the time of the procedure
Y89
Sequelae of other external causes
Y89.0 Sequelae of legal intervention
Y89.1 Sequelae of war operations
Y89.9 Sequelae of unspecified external cause
961
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Y90
Supplementary factors related to causes of morbidity and
mortality classified elsewhere
(Y90-Y98)
Note:
Y90
These categories may be used, if desired, to provide supplementary information concerning causes of morbidity
and mortality. They are not to be used for single-condition coding in morbidity or mortality.
Evidence of alcohol involvement determined by blood alcohol level
Y90.0 Blood alcohol level of less than 20 mg/100 ml
Y90.1 Blood alcohol level of 20-39 mg/100 ml
Y90.2 Blood alcohol level of 40-59 mg/100 ml
Y90.3 Blood alcohol level of 60-79 mg/100 ml
Y90.4 Blood alcohol level of 80-99 mg/100 ml
Y90.5 Blood alcohol level of 100-119 mg/100 ml
Y90.6 Blood alcohol level of 120-199 mg/100 ml
Y90.7 Blood alcohol level of 200-239 mg/100 ml
Y90.8 Blood alcohol level of 240 mg/100 ml or more
Y90.9 Presence of alcohol in blood, level not specified
Y91
Evidence of alcohol involvement determined by level of intoxication
Excludes:
evidence of alcohol involvement determined by blood alcohol content (Y90.-)
Y91.0 Mild alcohol intoxication
     Includes:
    Smell of alcohol on breath, slight behavioural disturbance in functions and responses, or slight
   difficulty in coordination.
Y91.1 Moderate alcohol intoxication
     Includes:
    Smell of alcohol on breath, moderate behavioural disturbance in functions and responses, or
   moderate difficulty in coordination.
Y91.2 Severe alcohol intoxication
     Includes:
    Severe disturbance in functions and responses, severe difficulty in coordination, or impaired
   ability to cooperate.
Y91.3 Very severe alcohol intoxication
     Includes:
    Very severe disturbance in functions and responses, very severe difficulty in coordination, or
   loss of ability to cooperate.
Y91.9 Alcohol involvement, not otherwise specified
     Includes:
    Suspected alcohol involvement NOS
Y95 Nosocomial condition
Y96 Work-related condition
Y97 Environmental-pollution-related condition
Y98 Lifestyle-related condition
962
I
CHAPTER XXI
Factors influencing health status and contact with
health services
(Z00-Z99)
Note:
This chapter should not be used for international comparison or for primary mortality coding.
Categories Z00-Z99 are provided for occasions when circumstances other than a disease, injury or external
cause classifiable to categories A00-Y89 are recorded as "diagnoses" or "problems". This can arise in two main
ways:
(a) When a person who may or may not be sick encounters the health services for some specific purpose, such
as to receive limited care or service for a current condition, to donate an organ or tissue, to receive prophylactic
vaccination or to discuss a problem which is in itself not a disease or injury.
(b) When some circumstance or problem is present which influences the person's health status but is not in itself
a current illness or injury. Such factors may be elicited during population surveys, when the person may or may
not be currently sick, or be recorded as an additional factor to be borne in mind when the person is receiving
care for some illness or injury.
This chapter contains the following blocks:
Z00-Z13
Z20-Z29
Z30-Z39
Z40-Z54
Z55-Z65
Z70-Z76
Z80-Z99
Persons encountering health services for examination and investigation
Persons with potential health hazards related to communicable diseases
Persons encountering health services in circumstances related to reproduction
Persons encountering health services for specific procedures and health care
Persons with potential health hazards related to socioeconomic and psychosocial circumstances
Persons encountering health services in other circumstances
Persons with potential health hazards related to family and personal history and certain conditions
influencing health status
963
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z00
Persons encountering health services for examination and
investigation
(Z00-Z13)
Note:
Excludes:
Z00
Nonspecific abnormal findings disclosed at the time of these examinations are classified to categories (R70-
R94).
examinations related to pregnancy and reproduction (Z30-Z36, Z39.-)
General examination and investigation of persons without complaint and
reported diagnosis
Excludes:
examination for administrative purposes (Z02.-)
special screening examinations (Z11-Z13)
Z00.0 General medical examination
     Includes:
    Health check-up NOS
   Periodic examination (annual)(physical)
  Excludes:
 general health check-up of:
•
 defined subpopulations (Z10.-)
•
 infant or child (Z00.1)
Z00.1 Routine child health examination
     Includes:
    Development testing of infant or child
   Excludes:
  health supervision of foundling or other healthy infant or child (Z76.1-Z76.2)
Z00.2 Examination for period of rapid growth in childhood
Z00.3 Examination for adolescent development state
     Includes:
    Puberty development state
Z00.4 General psychiatric examination, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    examination requested for medicolegal reasons (Z04.6)
Z00.5 Examination of potential donor of organ and tissue
Z00.6 Examination for normal comparison and control in clinical research programme
Z00.8 Other general examinations
     Includes:
    Health examination in population surveys
Z01
Other special examinations and investigations of persons without complaint
or reported diagnosis
Includes:
Excludes:
Routine examination of specific system
examination for:
•
administrative purposes (Z02.-)
•
suspected conditions, not proven (Z03.-)
special screening examinations (Z11-Z13)
Z01.0 Examination of eyes and vision
     Excludes:
    examination for driving licence (Z02.40)
Z01.1 Examination of ears and hearing
Z01.2 Dental examination
Z01.3 Examination of blood pressure
Z01.4 Gynaecological examination (general)(routine)
     Includes:
    Papanicolaou smear of cervix
   Pelvic examination (annual)(periodic)
  Excludes:
 pregnancy examination or test (Z32.-)
routine examination for contraceptive maintenance (Z30.4-Z30.5)
964
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z01.5
Diagnostic skin and sensitization tests
Includes:
Allergy tests
Skin tests for:
•
bacterial disease
•
hypersensitivity
Z01.6 Radiological examination, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Routine:
   •
    chest Xray
   •
    mammogram
Z01.7 Laboratory examination
Z01.8 Other specified special examinations
Z01.9 
Z02.9
Special examination, unspecified
Z02
Examination and encounter for administrative purposes
Z02.0 Examination for admission to educational institution
     Includes:
    Examination for admission to preschool (education)
Z02.1 Pre-employment examination
     Excludes:
    occupational health examination (Z10.0)
Z02.2 Examination for admission to residential institution
     Excludes:
    Examination for admission to prison (Z02.8)
   general health check-up of inhabitants of institutions (Z10.1)
Z02.3 Examination for recruitment to armed forces
     Excludes:
    general health check-up of armed forces (Z10.2)
Z02.4 Examination for transport licence
Z02.40o Examination for driving licence
Z02.41o Examination for flying/pilot licence
Z02.48o Examination for other transport licence
Z02.5 Examination for participation in sport
     Excludes:
    blood-alcohol and blood-drug test (Z04.0)
   general health check-up of sports teams (Z10.3)
Z02.6 Examination for insurance purposes
Z02.7 Issue of medical certificate
     Includes:
    Issue of medical certificate of:
   •
    cause of death
   •
    fitness
   •
    incapacity
   •
    invalidity
   Excludes:
  encounter for general medical examination ((Z00-Z01)(Z02.0-Z02.6)(Z02.8-Z02.9)(Z10.-)
Z02.8 Other examinations for administrative purposes
Z02.80o Encounter for paternity testing
Z02.81o Encounter for adoption services
Z02.88o Encounter for other administrative examinations
       Includes:
      Examination for:
     •
      admission to:
     •
      prison
     •
      summer camp
     •
      immigration
     •
      naturalization
     Examination, premarital
    Excludes:
   health supervision of foundling or other healthy infant or child (Z76.1- Z76.2)
Z02.9 Examination for administrative purposes, unspecified
965
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z03
Medical observation and evaluation for suspected diseases and conditions
Includes:
Z03
Excludes:
persons who present some symptoms or evidence of an abnormal condition which requires
study, but who, after examination and observation, show no need for further treatment or
medical care
person with feared complaint in whom no diagnosis is made (Z71.1)
Z03.0 Observation for suspected tuberculosis
Z03.1 Observation for suspected malignant neoplasm
Z03.2 Observation for suspected mental and behavioural disorders
     Includes:
    Observation for:
•
•
•
•
dissocial behaviour
fire-setting
gang activity
shop lifting
without manifest psychiatric disorder
Z03.3 Observation for suspected nervous system disorder
     Includes:
    Suspected neurological condition
Z03.4 Observation for suspected myocardial infarction
Z03.5 Observation for other suspected cardiovascular diseases
Z03.6 Observation for suspected toxic effect from ingested substance
     Includes:
    Observation for suspected:
   •
    adverse effect from drug
   •
    poisoning
Z03.8 Observation for other suspected diseases and conditions
     Includes:
    Suspected:
   •
    infectious condition
   •
    respiratory condition
Z03.9 Observation for suspected disease or condition, unspecified
Z04
Examination and observation for other reasons
Includes:
Examination for medicolegal reasons
Z04.0 Blood-alcohol and blood-drug test
     Excludes:
    presence of:
   •
    alcohol in blood (R78.0)
   •
    drugs in blood (R78.-)
Z04.1 Examination and observation following transport accident
     Excludes:
    following work accident (Z04.2)
Z04.2 Examination and observation following work accident
Z04.3 Examination and observation following other accident
Z04.4 Examination and observation following alleged rape and seduction
     Includes:
    Examination of victim or culprit following alleged rape or seduction
Z04.5 Examination and observation following other inflicted injury
     Includes:
    Examination of victim or culprit following other inflicted injury
Z04.50o Examination and observation following alleged adult sexual and physical abuse
Z04.51o Examination and observation following alleged child sexual and physical abuse
Z04.58o Examination and observation following other inflicted injury
Z04.6 General psychiatric examination, requested by authority
Z04.8 Examination and observation for other specified reasons
     Includes:
    Request for expert evidence
966
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z04.9
Z08
Examination and observation for unspecified reason
Includes:
Observation NOS
Z10.8
Follow-up examination after treatment for malignant neoplasm
Includes:
Excludes:
Medical surveillance following treatment
follow-up medical care and convalescence (Z42-Z51)(Z54.-)
Z08.0 Follow-up examination after surgery for malignant neoplasm
     Note:
    When a patient is admitted for follow up investigations and/or treatment and no disease is found.
Z08.1 Follow-up examination after radiotherapy for malignant neoplasm
     Excludes:
    radiotherapy session (Z51.0)
Z08.2 Follow-up examination after chemotherapy for malignant neoplasm
     Excludes:
    chemotherapy session (Z51.1)
Z08.7 Follow-up examination after combined treatment for malignant neoplasm
Z08.8 Follow-up examination after other treatment for malignant neoplasm
Z08.9 Follow-up examination after unspecified treatment for malignant neoplasm
Z09
Follow-up examination after treatment for conditions other than malignant
neoplasms
Includes:
Excludes:
Medical surveillance following treatment
follow-up medical care and convalescence (Z42-Z51)(Z54.-)
medical surveillance following treatment for malignant neoplasms (Z08.-)
surveillance of:
•
contraception (Z30.4-Z30.5)
•
prosthetic and other medical devices (Z44-Z46)
Z09.0 Follow-up examination after surgery for other conditions
Z09.1 Follow-up examination after radiotherapy for other conditions
     Excludes:
    radiotherapy session (Z51.0)
Z09.2 Follow-up examination after chemotherapy for other conditions
     Excludes:
    maintenance chemotherapy (Z51.1-Z51.2)
Z09.3 Follow-up examination after psychotherapy
Z09.4 Follow-up examination after treatment of fracture
Z09.7 Follow-up examination after combined treatment for other conditions
Z09.8 Follow-up examination after other treatment for other conditions
Z09.9 Follow-up examination after unspecified treatment for other conditions
Z10 Routine general health check-up of defined subpopulation
Excludes:
medical examination for administrative purposes (Z02.-)
Z10.0 Occupational health examination
     Excludes:
    pre-employment examination (Z02.1)
Z10.1 Routine general health check-up of inhabitants of institutions
     Excludes:
    admission examination (Z02.2)
Z10.2 Routine general health check-up of armed forces
     Excludes:
    recruitment examination (Z02.3)
Z10.3 Routine general health check-up of sports teams
     Excludes:
    blood-alcohol and blood-drug test (Z04.0)
   examination for participation in sport (Z02.5)
Z10.8 Routine general health check-up of other defined subpopulations
     Includes:
    Schoolchildren
   Students
967
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z11
Z11
Special screening examination for infectious and parasitic diseases
Z11.0 Special screening examination for intestinal infectious diseases
Z11.1 Special screening examination for respiratory tuberculosis
Z11.2 Special screening examination for other bacterial diseases
Z11.3 Special screening examination for infections with a predominantly sexual mode of
     transmission
Z11.4 Special screening examination for human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]
Z11.5 Special screening examination for other viral diseases
     Excludes:
    viral intestinal disease (Z11.0)
Z11.6 Special screening examination for other protozoal diseases and helminthiases
     Excludes:
    protozoal intestinal disease (Z11.0)
Z11.8 Special screening examination for other infectious and parasitic diseases
     Includes:
    Chlamydial diseases
   Mycoses
  Rickettsial diseases
 Spirochaetal diseases
Z11.9 Special screening examination for infectious and parasitic diseases, unspecified
Z12
Special screening examination for neoplasms
Includes:
Encounter for special screening
Z12.0 Special screening examination for neoplasm of stomach
Z12.1 Special screening examination for neoplasm of intestinal tract
Z12.2 Special screening examination for neoplasm of respiratory organs
Z12.3 Special screening examination for neoplasm of breast
     Excludes:
    routine mammogram (Z01.6)
Z12.4 Special screening examination for neoplasm of cervix
     Excludes:
    when routine test or as part of general gynaecological examination (Z01.4)
Z12.5 Special screening examination for neoplasm of prostate
Z12.6 Special screening examination for neoplasm of bladder
Z12.8 Special screening examination for neoplasms of other sites
Z12.9 Special screening examination for neoplasm, unspecified
968
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z13
Special screening examination for other diseases and disorders
Z13.0 Z13.1 Special screening examination for diabetes mellitus
Z13.2 Special screening examination for nutritional disorders
Z13.3 Special screening examination for mental and behavioural disorders
     Includes:
    Alcoholism
   Depression
  Mental retardation
Z13.4 Special screening examination for certain developmental disorders in childhood
     Excludes:
    routine development testing of infant or child (Z00.1)
Z13.5 Special screening examination for eye and ear disorders
Z13.6 Special screening examination for cardiovascular disorders
Z13.7 Special screening examination for congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal
     abnormalities
Z13.8 Special screening examination for other specified diseases and disorders
     Includes:
    Dental disorder
   Endocrine and metabolic disorders
  Excludes:
 diabetes mellitus (Z13.1)
Z13.9 
Z13.9
Special screening examination for diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and
certain disorders involving the immune mechanism
Special screening examination, unspecified
969
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z20
Persons with potential health hazards related to communicable
diseases
(Z20-Z29)
Z20
Contact with and exposure to communicable diseases
Z20.0 Contact with and exposure to intestinal infectious diseases
Z20.1 Contact with and exposure to tuberculosis
Z20.2 Contact with and exposure to infections with a predominantly sexual mode of transmission
Z20.3 Contact with and exposure to rabies
Z20.4 Contact with and exposure to rubella
Z20.5 Contact with and exposure to viral hepatitis
Z20.6 Contact with and exposure to human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]
     Excludes:
    asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection status (Z21)
Z20.7 Contact with and exposure to pediculosis, acariasis and other infestations
Z20.8 Contact with and exposure to other communicable diseases
Z20.9 Contact with and exposure to unspecified communicable disease
Z21
Asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection status
Includes:
Excludes:
Z22
HIV positive NOS
contact with or exposure to human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] (Z20.6)
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease (B24)
human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease in pregnancy (O98.7-)
laboratory evidence of human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] (R75)
Carrier of infectious disease
Includes:
suspected carrier
Z22.0 Carrier of typhoid
Z22.1 Carrier of other intestinal infectious diseases
Z22.2 Carrier of diphtheria
Z22.3 Carrier of other specified bacterial diseases
Z22.30o Carrier of drug-resistant micro-organism
       Excludes:Resistance to antimicrobial and antineoplastic drugs (U82-U85)
Z22.300o Carrier of drug-resistant staphylococcus
Z22.301o Carrier of drug-resistant streptococcus
        Includes:
       Carrier of bacterial disease due to:
      •
       Pneumococcus
Z22.302o Carrier of drug-resistant enterococcus
Z22.303o Carrier of drug-resistant Clostridium difficile
Z22.304o Carrier of drug-resistant Escherichia coli
Z22.308o Carrier of other drug-resistant micro-organism
        Includes:
       Carrier of bacterial disease due to:
      •
       Meningococci
      •
       Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Z22.309o Carrier of unspecified drug-resistant micro-organism
Z22.38o Carrier of other specified bacterial diseases
970
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z22.4
Carrier of infections with a predominantly sexual mode of transmission
Includes:
Carrier of:
•
gonorrhoea
•
syphilis
Z22.5 Carrier of viral hepatitis
Z22.50o Carrier of viral hepatitis B
       Includes:
      Hepatitis B surface antigen [HbsAg] carrier
Z22.51o Carrier of viral hepatitis C
Z22.58o Carrier of other viral hepatitis
Z22.6 Carrier of human T-lymphotropic virus type- 1 [HTLV-1] infection
Z22.8 Carrier of other infectious diseases
Z22.9 
Z25.8
Carrier of infectious disease, unspecified
Z23
Need for immunization against single bacterial diseases
Excludes:
immunization:
•
against combinations of diseases (Z27.-)
•
not carried out (Z28.-)
Z23.0 Need for immunization against cholera alone
Z23.1 Need for immunization against typhoid-paratyphoid alone [TAB]
Z23.2 Need for immunization against tuberculosis [BCG]
Z23.3 Need for immunization against plague
Z23.4 Need for immunization against tularaemia
Z23.5 Need for immunization against tetanus alone
Z23.6 Need for immunization against diphtheria alone
Z23.7 Need for immunization against pertussis alone
Z23.8 Need for immunization against other single bacterial diseases
Z24
Need for immunization against certain single viral diseases
Excludes:
immunization:
•
against combinations of diseases (Z27.-)
•
not carried out (Z28.-)
Z24.0 Need for immunization against poliomyelitis
Z24.1 Need for immunization against arthropod-borne viral encephalitis
Z24.2 Need for immunization against rabies
Z24.3 Need for immunization against yellow fever
Z24.4 Need for immunization against measles alone
Z24.5 Need for immunization against rubella alone
Z24.6 Need for immunization against viral hepatitis
Z25
Need for immunization against other single viral diseases
Excludes:
immunization:
•
against combinations of diseases (Z27.-)
•
not carried out (Z28.-)
Z25.0 Need for immunization against mumps alone
Z25.1 Need for immunization against influenza
Z25.8 Need for immunization against other specified single viral diseases
971
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z26
Need for immunization against other single infectious diseases
Excludes:
Z26
immunization:
•
against combinations of diseases (Z27.-)
•
not carried out (Z28.-)
Z26.0 Need for immunization against leishmaniasis
Z26.8 Need for immunization against other specified single infectious diseases
Z26.9 Need for immunization against unspecified infectious disease
     Includes:
    Need for immunization NOS
Z27
Need for immunization against combinations of infectious diseases
Excludes:
immunization not carried out (Z28.-)
Z27.0 Need for immunization against cholera with typhoid-paratyphoid [cholera † TAB]
Z27.1 Need for immunization against diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis, combined [DTP]
Z27.2 Need for immunization against diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis with typhoid-paratyphoid [DTP †
       TAB]
Z27.3 Need for immunization against diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis with poliomyelitis [DTP † polio]
Z27.4 Need for immunization against measles-mumps-rubella [MMR]
Z27.8 Need for immunization against other combinations of infectious diseases
Z27.9 Need for immunization against unspecified combinations of infectious diseases
Z28
Immunization not carried out
Z28.0 Immunization not carried out because of contraindication
Z28.1 Immunization not carried out because of patient's decision for reasons of belief or group
     pressure
Z28.2 Immunization not carried out because of patient's decision for other and unspecified reasons
Z28.8 Immunization not carried out for other reasons
Z28.9 Immunization not carried out for unspecified reason
Z29
Need for other prophylactic measures
Excludes:
Z29.0
Isolation
Includes:
desensitization to allergens (Z51.6)
prophylactic surgery (Z40.-)
Admission to protect the individual from his or her surroundings or for isolation of individual
after contact with infectious disease
Z29.1 Prophylactic immunotherapy
     Includes:
    Administration of immunoglobulin
Z29.2 Other prophylactic chemotherapy
     Includes:
    Chemoprophylaxis
   Heparin therapy
  Prophylactic antibiotic therapy
Z29.8 Other specified prophylactic measures
Z29.9 Prophylactic measure, unspecified
972
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Persons encountering health services in circumstances related
to reproduction
(Z30-Z39)
Z30
Z33
Contraceptive management
Z30.0 General counselling and advice on contraception
     Includes:
    Family planning advice NOS
   Initial prescription of contraceptives
Z30.1 Insertion of (intrauterine) contraceptive device
Z30.2 Sterilization
     Includes:
    Admission for interruption of fallopian tubes or vasa deferentia
Z30.3 Menstrual extraction
     Includes:
    Interception of pregnancy
   Menstrual regulation
Z30.4 Surveillance of contraceptive drugs
     Includes:
    Repeat prescription for contraceptive pill or other contraceptive drugs
   Routine examination for contraceptive maintenance
Z30.5 Surveillance of (intrauterine) contraceptive device
     Includes:
    Checking, reinsertion or removal of (intrauterine) contraceptive device
Z30.8 Other contraceptive management
     Includes:
    Postvasectomy sperm count
Z30.9 Contraceptive management, unspecified
Z31
Procreative management
Excludes:
complications associated with artificial fertilization (N98.-)
Z31.0 Tuboplasty or vasoplasty after previous sterilization
Z31.1 Artificial insemination
Z31.2 In vitro fertilization
     Includes:
    Admission for harvesting or implantation of ova
Z31.3 Other assisted fertilization methods
Z31.4 Procreative investigation and testing
     Includes:
    Fallopian insufflation
   Sperm count
  Excludes:
 postvasectomy sperm count (Z30.8)
Z31.5 Genetic counselling
Z31.6 General counselling and advice on procreation
     Includes:
    Counselling for elective termination of pregnancy
Z31.8 Other procreative management
Z31.9 Procreative management, unspecified
Z32
Pregnancy examination and test
Z32.0 Pregnancy, not (yet) confirmed
Z32.1 Pregnancy confirmed
Z33
Pregnant state, incidental
Includes:
Pregnant state NOS
973
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z34
Z34
Supervision of normal pregnancy
Z34.0 Supervision of normal first pregnancy
Z34.8 Supervision of other normal pregnancy
Z34.9 Supervision of normal pregnancy, unspecified
Z35
Supervision of high-risk pregnancy
Z35.0 Supervision of pregnancy with history of infertility
Z35.1 Supervision of pregnancy with history of abortive outcome
     Includes:
    Supervision of pregnancy with history of:
   •
    hydatidiform mole
   •
    vesicular mole
   Excludes:
  habitual aborter:
 •
  care during pregnancy (O26.2-)
 •
  without current pregnancy (N96)
Z35.2 Supervision of pregnancy with other poor reproductive or obstetric history
     Includes:
    Supervision of pregnancy with history of:
   •
    conditions classifiable to (O10-O92)
   •
    neonatal death
   •
    stillbirth
Z35.3 Supervision of pregnancy with history of insufficient antenatal care
     Includes:
    Pregnancy:
   •
    concealed
   •
    hidden
Z35.4 Supervision of pregnancy with grand multiparity
     Excludes:
    multiparity without current pregnancy (Z64.1)
Z35.5 Supervision of elderly primigravida
Z35.6 Supervision of very young primigravida
Z35.7 Supervision of high-risk pregnancy due to social problems
Z35.8 Supervision of other high-risk pregnancies
Z35.80o Supervision of elderly multigravida
       Includes:
      Pregnancy of female 35 years of age and older
Z35.88o Supervision of other high-risk pregnancy
       Includes:
      High risk pregnancy restricted to bed rest
Z35.9 Supervision of high-risk pregnancy, unspecified
Z36
Antenatal screening
Excludes:
abnormal findings on antenatal screening of mother (O28.-)
routine prenatal care (Z34-Z35)
Z36.0 Antenatal screening for chromosomal anomalies
     Includes:
    Amniocentesis
   Placental sample (taken vaginally)
Z36.1 Antenatal screening for raised alphafetoprotein level
Z36.2 Other antenatal screening based on amniocentesis
Z36.3 Antenatal screening for malformations using ultrasound and other physical methods
Z36.4 Antenatal screening for fetal growth retardation using ultrasound and other physical methods
Z36.5 Antenatal screening for isoimmunization
Z36.8 Other antenatal screening
     Includes:
    Screening for haemoglobinopathy
Z36.9 Antenatal screening, unspecified
974
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z37
Outcome of delivery
Note:
Use this category to describe a perfectly normal delivery (without complications). This category
is also intended for use as an additional code to identify the outcome of delivery on the mother's
record.
Z37.0 Single live birth
Z37.000o Single live birth, pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous ovulation and conception
        Includes:
       Conception, NOS
Z37.001o Single live birth, pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART)
        Includes:
       Assisted reproduction, ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), embryo
      transfer, and in vitro fertilization (IVF)
Z37.1 Single stillbirth
Z37.100o Single stillbirth, pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous ovulation and conception
        Includes:
       Conception, NOS
Z37.101o Single stillbirth, pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART)
        Includes:
       Assisted reproduction, ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), embryo
      transfer, and in vitro fertilization (IVF)
Z37.2 Twins, both liveborn
Z37.200o Twins, both liveborn, pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous ovulation and conception
        Includes:
       Conception, NOS
Z37.201o Twins, both liveborn, pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART)
        Includes:
       Assisted reproduction, ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), embryo
      transfer, and in vitro fertilization (IVF)
Z37.3 Twins, one liveborn and one stillborn
Z37.300o Twins, one liveborn and one stillborn, pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous ovulation
        and conception
       Includes:
      Conception, NOS
Z37.301o Twins, one liveborn and one stillborn, pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive
        technology (ART)
       Includes:
      Assisted reproduction, ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), embryo
     transfer, and in vitro fertilization (IVF)
Z37.4 Twins, both stillborn
Z37.400o Twins, both stillborn, pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous ovulation and conception
        Includes:
       Conception, NOS
Z37.401o Twins both stillborn, pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART)
        Includes:
       Assisted reproduction, ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), embryo
      transfer, and in vitro fertilization (IVF)
Z37.5 
Z37.5
Other multiple births, all liveborn
Note:
Assisted reproductive technology includes ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm
injection (ICSI), embryo transfer, and in vitro fertilization (IVF).
Z37.5 Other multiple births, all liveborn Pregnancy resulting from both Pregnancy resulting from
                                          spontaneous (NOS) ovulation assisted reproductive
                                          and conception technology (ART)
Z37.50 Triplets, all liveborn Z37.500o Z37.501o
Z37.51 Quadruplets, all liveborn Z37.510o Z37.511o
Z37.52 Quintuplets, all liveborn Z37.520o Z37.521o
Z37.53 Sextuplets, all liveborn Z37.530o Z37.531o
Z37.58 Other multiple births, all liveborn Z37.580o Z37.581o
Z37.59 Multiple births, unspecified, all liveborn Z37.590o Z37.591o
975
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z37.6
Z37.6
Other multiple births, some liveborn
Note:
Assisted reproductive technology includes ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm
injection (ICSI), embryo transfer, and in vitro fertilization (IVF).
Z37.6 Other multiple births, some Pregnancy resulting from both Pregnancy resulting from
liveborn spontaneous (NOS) ovulation assisted reproductive
         and conception technology (ART)
Z37.60 Triplets, some liveborn Z37.600o Z37.601o
Z37.61 Quadruplets, some liveborn Z37.610o Z37.611o
Z37.62 Quintuplets, some liveborn Z37.620o Z37.621o
Z37.63 Sextuplets, some liveborn Z37.630o Z37.631o
Z37.68 Other multiple births, some liveborn Z37.680o Z37.681o
Z37.69 Multiple births, unspecified, some Z37.690o Z37.691o
liveborn 
Z37.7
Other multiple births, all stillborn
Note:
Assisted reproductive technology includes ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm
injection (ICSI), embryo transfer, and in vitro fertilization (IVF).
Z37.7 Other multiple births, all stillborn Pregnancy resulting from both Pregnancy resulting from
                                           spontaneous (NOS) ovulation assisted reproductive
                                           and conception technology (ART)
Z37.70 Triplets, all stillborn Z37.700o Z37.701o
Z37.71 Quadruplets, all stillborn Z37.710o Z37.711o
Z37.72 Quintuplets, all stillborn Z37.720o Z37.721o
Z37.73 Sextuplets, all stillborn Z37.730o Z37.731o
Z37.78 Other multiple births, all stillborn Z37.780o Z37.781o
Z37.79 Multiple births, unspecified, all stillborn Z37.790o Z37.791o
Z37.9
Outcome of delivery, unspecified
Note:
Assisted reproductive technology includes ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm
injection (ICSI), embryo transfer, and in vitro fertilization (IVF).
Z37.9 Outcome of delivery, unspecified Pregnancy resulting from both Pregnancy resulting from
                                       spontaneous (NOS) ovulation assisted reproductive
                                       and conception technology (ART)
Z37.90 Multiple births, unspecified Z37.900o Z37.901o
Z37.910o Z37.911o
Includes
• Multiple births, NOS
Z37.91 Single birth unspecified
Includes
• Single birth, NOS
Z38
Z38.0
Liveborn infants according to place of birth
Singleton, born in hospital
Note:
Assisted reproductive technology includes ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm
injection (ICSI), embryo transfer, and in vitro fertilization (IVF).
Z38.0 Singleton, born in hospital Product of both spontaneous
                                 Product of assisted
                                (NOS) ovulation and conception reproductive technology (ART)
Z38.00 delivered vaginally Z38.000o
Z38.001o
Z38.01 delivered by caesarean Z38.010o
Z38.011o
976
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z38.1 Singleton, born outside hospital
Z38.100o Singleton, born outside hospital, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and
        conception
       Includes:
      Conception, NOS
Z38.101o Singleton, born outside hospital, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART)
        Includes:
       Assisted reproduction, ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), embryo
      transfer and in vitro fertilization (IVF)
Z38.2 Singleton, unspecified as to place of birth
     Includes:
    Liveborn infant NOS
Z38.200o Singleton, unspecified as to place of birth, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and
        conception
       Includes:
      Conception, NOS
Z38.201o Singleton, unspecified as to place of birth, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART)
        Includes:
       Assisted reproduction, ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), embryo
      transfer and in vitro fertilization (IVF)
Z38.3 Twin, born in hospital
     Note:
    Assisted reproductive technology includes ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm
   injection (ICSI), embryo transfer, and in vitro fertilization (IVF).
Z38.501o
Z38.3 Twin, born in hospital Product of both spontaneous
                            Product of assisted
                           (NOS) ovulation and conception reproductive technology (ART)
Z38.30 delivered vaginally Z38.300o
Z38.301o
Z38.31 delivered by caesarean Z38.310o
Z38.311o
Z38.4 Twin, born outside hospital
Z38.400o Twin, born outside hospital, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception
        Includes:
       Conception, NOS
Z38.401o Twin, born outside hospital, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART)
        Includes:
       Assisted reproduction, ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), embryo
      transfer and in vitro fertilization (IVF)
Z38.5 Twin, unspecified as to place of birth
Z38.500o Twin, unspecified as to place of birth, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and
        conception
       Includes:
      Conception, NOS
Z38.501o Twin, unspecified as to place of birth, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART)
        Includes:
       Assisted reproduction, ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), embryo
      transfer and in vitro fertilization (IVF)
977
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z38.6
Z38.6
Other multiple, born in hospital
Note:
Assisted reproductive technology includes ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm
injection (ICSI), embryo transfer, and in vitro fertilization (IVF).
Z38.6 Other multiple, born in hospital Product of both spontaneous
                                      Product of assisted
                                     (NOS) ovulation and conception reproductive technology (ART)
Z38.60 Triplet, born in hospital, delivered Z38.600o
vaginally 
Z38.601o
Z38.61 Triplet, born in hospital, delivered by Z38.610o
caesarean 
Z38.611o
Z38.62 Quadruplet, born in hospital, delivered Z38.620o
vaginally
Z38.621o
Z38.63 Quadruplet, born in hospital, delivered Z38.630o
by caesarean
Z38.631o
Z38.64 Quintuplet, born in hospital, delivered Z38.640o
vaginally 
Z38.641o
Z38.65 Quintuplet, born in hospital, delivered Z38.650o
by caesarean 
Z38.651o
Z38.66 Sextuplet, born in hospital, delivered Z38.660o
vaginally 
Z38.661o
Z38.67 Sextuplet, born in hospital, delivered by Z38.670o
caesarean
Z38.671o
Z38.68 Other multiple birth, born in hospital, Z38.680o
delivered vaginally 
Z38.681o
Z38.69 Other multiple birth, born in hospital, Z38.690o
delivered by caesarean 
Z38.691o
Z38.7 Other multiple, born outside hospital
     Includes:
    Triplet, quadruplet, quintuplet, sextuplet, multiple NOS.
Z38.700o Other multiple, born outside hospital, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and
        conception
       Includes:
      Conception, NOS
Z38.701o Other multiple, born outside hospital, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART)
        Includes:
       Assisted reproduction, ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), embryo
      transfer and in vitro fertilization (IVF)
Z38.8 Other multiple, unspecified as to place of birth
     Includes:
    Triplet, quadruplet, quintuplet, sextuplet, multiple NOS
Z38.800o Other multiple, unspecified as to place of birth, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation
        and conception
       Includes:
      Conception, NOS
Z38.801o Other multiple, unspecified as to place of birth, product of assisted reproductive technology
        (ART)
       Includes:
      Assisted reproduction, ovulation induction, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), embryo
     transfer and in vitro fertilization (IVF)
978
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z39
Postpartum care and examination
Z39.0 Z39.1 Care and examination of lactating mother
           Includes:
          Supervision of lactation
         Excludes:
        disorders of lactation (O92.-)
Z39.2 
Z39.2
Care and examination immediately after delivery
Includes:
Care and observation in uncomplicated cases
Excludes:
care for postpartum complications - see Alphabetical Index
Routine postpartum follow-up
979
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z40
Persons encountering health services for specific procedures
and health care
(Z40-Z54)
Note:
Excludes:
Z40
Categories (Z40-Z54) are intended for use to indicate a reason for care. They may be used for patients who have
already been treated for a disease or injury, but who are receiving follow-up or prophylactic care, convalescent
care, or care to consolidate the treatment, to deal with residual states, to ensure that the condition has not
recurred, or to prevent recurrence.
follow-up examination for medical surveillance after treatment (Z08-Z09)
Prophylactic surgery
Z40.0 Prophylactic surgery for risk-factors related to malignant neoplasms
     Includes:
    Admission for prophylactic organ removal
Z40.00o Prophylactic removal of breast
       Includes:
      Prophylactic mastectomy
Z40.01o Prophylactic removal of ovary
       Includes:
      Prophylactic oophorectomy
Z40.08o Prophylactic removal of other organ
Z40.8 Other prophylactic surgery
Z40.9 Prophylactic surgery, unspecified
Z41
Procedures for purposes other than remedying health state
Z41.0 Hair transplant
Z41.1 Other plastic surgery for unacceptable cosmetic appearance
     Includes:
    Breast implant
   Excludes:
  plastic and reconstructive surgery following healed injury or operation (Z42.-)
Z41.2 Routine and ritual circumcision
Z41.3 Ear piercing
Z41.8 Other procedures for purposes other than remedying health state
Z41.9 Procedure for purposes other than remedying health state, unspecified
Z42
Follow-up care involving plastic surgery
Includes:
Excludes:
plastic and reconstructive surgery following healed injury or operation
repair of scarred tissue
plastic surgery:
•
as treatment for current injury - code to relevant injury - see Alphabetical Index
•
for unacceptable cosmetic appearance (Z41.1)
Z42.0 Follow-up care involving plastic surgery of head and neck
Z42.1 Follow-up care involving plastic surgery of breast
Z42.2 Follow-up care involving plastic surgery of other parts of trunk
Z42.3 Follow-up care involving plastic surgery of upper extremity
Z42.4 Follow-up care involving plastic surgery of lower extremity
Z42.8 Follow-up care involving plastic surgery of other body part
Z42.9 Follow-up care involving plastic surgery, unspecified
980
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z43
Attention to artificial openings
Includes:
Excludes:
closure
passage of sounds or bougies
reforming
removal of catheter
takedown stoma
toilet or cleansing
artificial opening status only, without need for care (Z93.-)
complications of external stoma (J95.0), (K91.4), (N99.5)
fitting and adjustment of prosthetic and other devices (Z44-Z46)
Z43.0 Attention to tracheostomy
Z43.1 Attention to gastrostomy
Z43.2 Attention to ileostomy
Z43.3 Attention to colostomy
Z43.4 Attention to other artificial openings of digestive tract
Z43.5 Attention to cystostomy
Z43.6 Attention to other artificial openings of urinary tract
     Includes:
    Nephrostomy
   Ureterostomy
  Urethrostomy
Z43.7 Attention to artificial vagina
Z43.8 Attention to other artificial openings
Z43.9 
Z45.9
Attention to unspecified artificial opening
Z44
Fitting and adjustment of external prosthetic device
Excludes:
presence of prosthetic device (Z97.-)
Z44.0 Fitting and adjustment of artificial arm (complete)(partial)
Z44.1 Fitting and adjustment of artificial leg (complete)(partial)
Z44.2 Fitting and adjustment of artificial eye
     Excludes:
    mechanical complication of ocular prosthesis (T85.3)
Z44.3 Fitting and adjustment of external breast prosthesis
Z44.8 Fitting and adjustment of other external prosthetic devices
Z44.9 Fitting and adjustment of unspecified external prosthetic device
Z45
Adjustment and management of implanted device
Excludes:
malfunction or other complications of device - see Alphabetical Index
presence of prosthetic and other devices (Z95-Z97)
Z45.0 Adjustment and management of cardiac pacemaker
     Includes:
    Checking and testing
   of pulse generator [battery]
  Replacement
Z45.1 Adjustment and management of infusion pump
Z45.2 Adjustment and management of vascular access device
     Excludes:
    insertion of a vascular access device (Z51.4)
Z45.3 Adjustment and management of implanted hearing device
     Includes:
    Bone conduction device
   Cochlear device
Z45.8 Adjustment and management of other implanted devices
Z45.9 Adjustment and management of unspecified implanted device
981
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z46
Fitting and adjustment of other devices
Excludes:
Z46
issue of repeat prescription only (Z76.0)
malfunction or other complications of device - see Alphabetical Index
presence of prosthetic and other devices (Z95-Z97)
Z46.0 Fitting and adjustment of spectacles and contact lenses
Z46.1 Fitting and adjustment of hearing aid
Z46.2 Fitting and adjustment of other devices related to nervous system and special senses
Z46.3 Fitting and adjustment of dental prosthetic device
Z46.4 Fitting and adjustment of orthodontic device
Z46.5 Fitting and adjustment of ileostomy and other intestinal appliances
Z46.6 Fitting and adjustment of urinary device
Z46.7 Fitting and adjustment of orthopaedic device
     Includes:
    Orthopaedic:
   •
    brace
   •
    cast
   •
    corset
   •
    shoes
Z46.8 Fitting and adjustment of other specified devices
     Includes:
    Wheelchair
Z46.9 Fitting and adjustment of unspecified device
Z47
Other orthopaedic follow-up care
Excludes:
care involving rehabilitation procedures (Z50.-)
complication of internal orthopaedic devices, implants and grafts (T84.-)
follow-up examination after treatment of fracture (Z09.4)
Z47.0 Follow-up care involving removal of fracture plate and other internal fixation device
     Includes:
    Removal of:
   •
    pins
   •
    plates
   •
    rods
   •
    screws
   Routine removal of an orthopaedic device when a fracture has healed.
  Excludes:
 removal of external fixation device (Z47.8)
Z47.8 Other specified orthopaedic follow-up care
     Includes:
    Change, checking or removal of:
   •
    external fixation or traction device
   •
    plaster cast
   Replacement of cast
Z47.9 Orthopaedic follow-up care, unspecified
Z48
Other surgical follow-up care
Excludes:
attention to artificial openings (Z43.-)
fitting and adjustment of prosthetic and other devices (Z44-Z46)
follow-up examination after:
•
surgery (Z09.0)
•
treatment of fracture (Z09.4)
orthopaedic follow-up care (Z47.-)
Z48.0 Attention to surgical dressings and sutures
     Includes:
    Change of dressings
   Removal of sutures
Z48.8 Other specified surgical follow-up care
     Includes:
    Change or removal of drains
   Postoperative wound closure (planned)
982
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z48.9
Z49
Surgical follow-up care, unspecified
Care involving dialysis
Includes:
Excludes:
Z51.801o
dialysis preparation and treatment
renal dialysis status (Z99.2)
Z49.0 Preparatory care for dialysis
     Includes:
    cut-down with insertion of vascular catheter
Z49.1 Extracorporeal dialysis
     Includes:
    Dialysis (renal) NOS
Z49.2 Other dialysis
     Includes:
    Peritoneal dialysis
Z50
Care involving use of rehabilitation procedures
Excludes:
counselling (Z70-Z71)
Z50.0 Cardiac rehabilitation
Z50.1 Other physical therapy
     Includes:
    Therapeutic and remedial exercises
Z50.2 Alcohol rehabilitation
Z50.3 Drug rehabilitation
Z50.4 Psychotherapy, not elsewhere classified
Z50.5 Speech therapy
Z50.6 Orthoptic training
Z50.7 Occupational therapy and vocational rehabilitation, not elsewhere classified
Z50.8 Care involving use of other rehabilitation procedures
     Includes:
    Tobacco rehabilitation
   Training in activities of daily living [ADL] NEC
Z50.9 Care involving use of rehabilitation procedure, unspecified
     Includes:
    Rehabilitation NOS
Z51
Other medical care
Excludes:
follow-up examination after treatment (Z08-Z09)
Z51.0 Radiotherapy session
Z51.1 Chemotherapy session for neoplasm
Z51.2 Other chemotherapy
     Includes:
    Antibiotic therapy
   Maintenance chemotherapy NOS
  Excludes:
 prophylactic chemotherapy for immunization purposes (Z23-Z27, Z29.-)
Z51.3 Blood transfusion (without reported diagnosis)
Z51.4 Preparatory care for subsequent treatment, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Insertion of vascular access device
   Excludes:
  Preparatory care for dialysis (Z49.0)
Z51.5 Palliative care
Z51.6 Desensitization to allergens
Z51.8 Z51.80o Other specified medical care
             Excludes:
            holiday relief care (Z75.5)
           Pain management therapy (for)
Z51.800o Somatic pain
Z51.801o Neurogenic pain
983
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z51.802o 
Z51.802
Visceral pain
Z51.808o Other and unspecified pain
Z51.88o Other specified medical care NEC
Z51.9 Medical care, unspecified
Z52
Donors of organs and tissues
Excludes:
examination of potential donor (Z00.5)
Z52.0 Blood donor
     Includes:
    Blood components such as lymphocytes, platelets or stem cells
Z52.1 Skin donor
Z52.2 Bone donor
Z52.3 Bone marrow donor
Z52.4 Kidney donor
Z52.5 Cornea donor
Z52.6 Liver Donor
Z52.7 Heart Donor
Z52.8 Donor of other organs and tissues
Z52.9 Donor of unspecified organ or tissue
     Includes:
    Donor NOS
Z53
Persons encountering health services for specific procedures, not carried
out
Excludes:
immunization not carried out (Z28.-)
Z53.0 Procedure not carried out because of contraindication
Z53.1 Procedure not carried out because of patient's decision for reasons of belief or group
     pressure
Z53.2 Procedure not carried out because of patient's decision for other and unspecified reasons
Z53.8 Procedure not carried out for other reasons
     Includes:
    Surgery cancelled due to administrative reasons (staffing issues)
Z53.9 Procedure not carried out, unspecified reason
Z54
Convalescence
Z54.0 Convalescence following surgery
Z54.1 Convalescence following radiotherapy
Z54.2 Convalescence following chemotherapy
Z54.3 Convalescence following psychotherapy
Z54.4 Convalescence following treatment of fracture
Z54.7 Convalescence following combined treatment
     Includes:
    Convalescence following any combination of treatments classified to (Z54.0-Z54.4)
Z54.8 Convalescence following other treatment
Z54.9 Convalescence following unspecified treatment
984
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Persons with potential health hazards related to socioeconomic
and psychosocial circumstances
(Z55-Z65)
Z55
Z58.0
Problems related to education and literacy
Excludes:
disorders of psychological development (F80-F89)
Z55.0 Illiteracy and low-level literacy
Z55.1 Schooling unavailable and unattainable
Z55.2 Failed examinations
Z55.3 Underachievement in school
Z55.4 Educational maladjustment and discord with teachers and classmates
Z55.8 Other problems related to education and literacy
     Includes:
    Inadequate teaching
Z55.9 Problem related to education and literacy, unspecified
Z56
Problems related to employment and unemployment
Excludes:
occupational exposure to risk-factors (Z57.-)
problems related to housing and economic circumstances (Z59.-)
Z56.0 Unemployment, unspecified
Z56.1 Change of job
Z56.2 Threat of job loss
Z56.3 Stressful work schedule
Z56.4 Discord with boss and workmates
Z56.5 Uncongenial work
     Includes:
    Difficult conditions at work
Z56.6 Other physical and mental strain related to work
Z56.7 Other and unspecified problems related to employment
Z57
Occupational exposure to risk-factors
Z57.0 Occupational exposure to noise
Z57.1 Occupational exposure to radiation
Z57.2 Occupational exposure to dust
Z57.3 Occupational exposure to other air contaminants
Z57.4 Occupational exposure to toxic agents in agriculture
     Includes:
    Solids, liquids, gases or vapours
Z57.5 Occupational exposure to toxic agents in other industries
     Includes:
    Solids, liquids, gases or vapours
Z57.6 Occupational exposure to extreme temperature
Z57.7 Occupational exposure to vibration
Z57.8 Occupational exposure to other risk-factors
Z57.9 Occupational exposure to unspecified risk-factor
Z58
Problems related to physical environment
Excludes:
Z58.0
occupational exposure (Z57.-)
Exposure to noise
985
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z58.1 
Z58.1
Exposure to air pollution
Excludes:
tobacco smoke (Z58.7)
Z58.2 Exposure to water pollution
Z58.3 Exposure to soil pollution
Z58.4 Exposure to radiation
Z58.5 Exposure to other pollution
Z58.6 Inadequate drinking-water supply
     Excludes:
    effects of thirst (T73.1)
Z58.7 Exposure to tobacco smoke
     Includes:
    Passive smoking
   Excludes:
  mental and behavioural disorders due to the use of tobacco (F17.-)
 personal history of tobacco use (Z86.42)
tobacco use (Z72.0)
Z58.8 Other problems related to physical environment
     Includes:
    Exposure to:
   •
    asbestos
   •
    lead
Z58.9 Problem related to physical environment, unspecified
Z59
Problems related to housing and economic circumstances
Excludes:
inadequate drinking-water supply (Z58.6)
Z59.0 Homelessness
Z59.1 Inadequate housing
     Includes:
    Lack of heating
   Restriction of space
  Technical defects in home preventing adequate care
 Unsatisfactory surroundings
Excludes:
problems related to physical environment (Z58.-)
Z59.2 Discord with neighbours, lodgers and landlord
Z59.3 Problems related to living in residential institution
     Includes:
    Boarding-school resident
   Excludes:
  institutional upbringing (Z62.2)
Z59.4 Lack of adequate food
     Excludes:
    effects of hunger (T73.0)
   inappropriate diet or eating habits (Z72.4)
  malnutrition (E40-E46)
Z59.5 Extreme poverty
Z59.6 Low income
Z59.7 Insufficient social insurance and welfare support
Z59.8 Other problems related to housing and economic circumstances
     Includes:
    Foreclosure on loan
   Isolated dwelling
  Problems with creditors
Z59.9 Problem related to housing and economic circumstances, unspecified
Z60
Z60.0
986
Problems related to social environment
Problems of adjustment to life-cycle transitions
Includes:
Adjustment to retirement [pension]
Empty nest syndrome
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z60.1
Atypical parenting situation
Includes:
Problems related to a parenting situation (rearing of children) with a single parent or other than
that of two cohabiting biological parents.
Z60.2 Living alone
Z60.3 Acculturation difficulty
     Includes:
    Migration
   Social transplantation
Z60.4 Social exclusion and rejection
     Includes:
    Exclusion and rejection on the basis of personal characteristics, such as unusual physical
   appearance, illness or behaviour.
  Excludes:
 target of adverse discrimination such as for racial or religious reasons (Z60.5)
Z60.5 Target of perceived adverse discrimination and persecution
     Includes:
    Persecution or discrimination, perceived or real, on the basis of membership of some group (as
   defined by skin colour, religion, ethnic origin, etc.) rather than personal characteristics.
  Excludes:
 social exclusion and rejection (Z60.4)
Z60.8 Other problems related to social environment
Z60.9 
Z61.6
Problem related to social environment, unspecified
Z61
Problems related to negative life events in childhood
Excludes:
maltreatment syndromes (T74.-)
Z61.0 Loss of love relationship in childhood
     Note:
    Loss of an emotionally close relationship, such as of a parent, a sibling, a very special friend or
   a loved pet, by death or permanent departure or rejection.
Z61.1 Removal from home in childhood
     Note:
    Admission to a foster home, hospital or other institution causing psychosocial stress, or forced
   conscription into an activity away from home for a prolonged period.
Z61.2 Altered pattern of family relationships in childhood
     Note:
    Arrival of a new person into a family resulting in adverse change in child's relationships. May
   include new marriage by a parent or birth of a sibling.
Z61.3 Events resulting in loss of self-esteem in childhood
     Note:
    Events resulting in a negative self-reappraisal by the child such as failure in tasks with high
   personal investment; disclosure or discovery of a shameful or stigmatizing personal or family
  event; and other humiliating experiences.
Z61.4 Problems related to alleged sexual abuse of child by person within primary support group
     Note:
    Problems related to any form of physical contact or exposure between an adult member of the
   child's household and the child that has led to sexual arousal, whether or not the child has
  willingly engaged in the sexual acts (e.g. any genital contact or manipulation or deliberate
 exposure of breasts or genitals).
Z61.5 Problems related to alleged sexual abuse of child by person outside primary support group
     Note:
    Problems related to contact or attempted contact with the child's or the other person's breasts or
   genitals, sexual exposure in close confrontation or attempt to undress or seduce the child, by a
  substantially older person outside the child's family, either on the basis of this person's position
 or status or against the will of the child.
Z61.6 Problems related to alleged physical abuse of child
     Note:
    Problems related to incidents in which the child has been injured in the past by any adult in the
   household to a medically significant extent (e.g. fractures, marked bruising) or that involved
  abnormal forms of violence (e.g. hitting the child with hard or sharp implements, burning or
 tying up of the child).
987
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z61.7 Personal frightening experience in childhood
     Note:
    Experience carrying a threat for the child's future, such as a kidnapping, natural disaster with a
   threat to life, injury with a threat to self-image or security, or witnessing a severe trauma to a
  loved one.
Z61.8 Other negative life events in childhood
Z61.9 Negative life event in childhood, unspecified
Z61.7
Z62
Other problems related to upbringing
Excludes:
maltreatment syndromes (T74.-)
Z62.0 Inadequate parental supervision and control
     Note:
    Lack of parental knowledge of what the child is doing or where the child is; poor control; lack
   of concern or lack of attempted intervention when the child is in risky situations.
Z62.1 Parental overprotection
     Note:
    Pattern of upbringing resulting in infantilization and prevention of independent behaviour.
Z62.2 Institutional upbringing
     Note:
    Group foster care in which parenting responsibilities are largely taken over by some form of
   institution (such as residential nursery, orphanage, or children's home), or therapeutic care over
  a prolonged period in which the child is in a hospital, convalescent home or the like, without at
 least one parent living with the child.
Z62.3 Hostility towards and scapegoating of child
     Note:
    Negative parental behaviour specifically focused on the child as an individual, persistent over
   time and pervasive over several child behaviours (e.g. automatically blaming the child for any
  problems in the household or attributing negative characteristics to the child).
Z62.4 Emotional neglect of child
     Note:
    Parent talking to the child in a dismissive or insensitive way. Lack of interest in the child, of
   sympathy for the child's difficulties and of praise and encouragement. Irritated reaction to
  anxious behaviour and absence of sufficient physical comforting and emotional warmth.
Z62.5 Other problems related to neglect in upbringing
     Note:
    Lack of learning and play experience
Z62.6 Inappropriate parental pressure and other abnormal qualities of upbringing
     Note:
    Parents forcing the child to be different from the local norm, either sex-inappropriate (e.g.
   dressing a boy in girl's clothes), age-inappropriate (e.g. forcing a child to take on responsibilities
  above her or his own age) or otherwise inappropriate (e.g. pressing the child to engage in
 unwanted or too difficult activities).
Z62.8 Other specified problems related to upbringing
Z62.9 Problem related to upbringing, unspecified
Z63
Other problems related to primary support group, including family
circumstances
Excludes:
maltreatment syndromes (T74.-)
problems related to:
•
negative life events in childhood (Z61.-)
•
upbringing (Z62.-)
Z63.0 Problems in relationship with spouse or partner
     Includes:
    Discord between partners resulting in severe or prolonged loss of control, in generalization of
   hostile or critical feelings or in a persisting atmosphere of severe interpersonal violence (hitting
  or striking).
Z63.1 Problems in relationship with parents and in-laws
Z63.2 Inadequate family support
Z63.3 Absence of family member
988
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z63.4 Disappearance and death of family member
     Includes:
    Assumed death of family member
Z63.5 Disruption of family by separation and divorce
     Includes:
    Estrangement
Z63.6 Dependent relative needing care at home
Z63.7 Other stressful life events affecting family and household
     Includes:
    Anxiety (normal) about sick person in family
   Health problems within family
  Ill or disturbed family member
 Isolated family
Z63.8 Other specified problems related to primary support group
     Includes:
    Family discord NOS
   High expressed emotional level within family
  Inadequate or distorted communication within family
Z63.9 Problem related to primary support group, unspecified
Z64
Z65.9
Problems related to certain psychosocial circumstances
Z64.0 Problems related to unwanted pregnancy
     Excludes:
    supervision of high-risk pregnancy due to social problems (Z35.7)
Z64.1 Problems related to multiparity
     Excludes:
    supervision of pregnancy with grand multiparity (Z35.4)
Z64.2 Seeking and accepting physical, nutritional and chemical interventions known to be
     hazardous and harmful
    Excludes:
   substance dependence - see Alphabetical Index
Z64.3 Seeking and accepting behavioural and psychological interventions known to be hazardous
     and harmful
Z64.4 Discord with counsellors
     Includes:
    Discord with:
   •
    probation officer
   •
    social worker
Z65
Problems related to other psychosocial circumstances
Excludes:
current injury - see Alphabetical Index
Z65.0 Conviction in civil and criminal proceedings without imprisonment
Z65.1 Imprisonment and other incarceration
Z65.2 Problems related to release from prison
Z65.3 Problems related to other legal circumstances
     Includes:
    Arrest
   Child custody or support proceedings
  Litigation
 Prosecution
Z65.4 Victim of crime and terrorism
     Includes:
    Victim of torture
Z65.5 Exposure to disaster, war and other hostilities
     Excludes:
    target of perceived discrimination or persecution (Z60.5)
Z65.8 Other specified problems related to psychosocial circumstances
Z65.9 Problem related to unspecified psychosocial circumstances
989
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z70
Persons encountering health services in other circumstances
(Z70-Z76)
Z70
Counselling related to sexual attitude, behaviour and orientation
Excludes:
contraceptive or procreative counselling (Z30-Z31)
Z70.0 Counselling related to sexual attitude
     Includes:
    Person concerned regarding embarrassment, timidity or other negative response to sexual
   matters
Z70.1 Counselling related to patient's sexual behaviour and orientation
     Includes:
    Patient concerned regarding:
   •
    impotence
   •
    non-responsiveness
   •
    promiscuity
   •
    sexual orientation
Z70.2 Counselling related to sexual behaviour and orientation of third party
     Includes:
    Advice sought regarding sexual behaviour and orientation of:
   •
    child
   •
    partner
   •
    spouse
Z70.3 Counselling related to combined concerns regarding sexual attitude, behaviour and
     orientation
Z70.8 Other sex counselling
     Includes:
    Sex education
Z70.9 Sex counselling, unspecified
Z71
Persons encountering health services for other counselling and medical
advice, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
contraceptive or procreation counselling (Z30-Z31)
sex counselling (Z70.-)
Z71.0 Person consulting on behalf of another person
     Includes:
    Advice or treatment for non-attending third party
   Excludes:
  anxiety (normal) about sick person in family (Z63.7)
Z71.1 Person with feared complaint in whom no diagnosis is made
     Includes:
    "Worried well"
   Feared condition not demonstrated
  Problem was normal state
 Excludes:
medical observation and evaluation for suspected diseases and conditions (Z03.-)
Z71.2 Person consulting for explanation of investigation findings
Z71.3 Dietary counselling and surveillance
     Includes:
    Dietary counselling and surveillance (for):
   •
    NOS
   •
    colitis
   •
    diabetes mellitus
   •
    food allergies or intolerance
   •
    gastritis
   •
    hypercholesterolaemia
   •
    obesity
Z71.4 Alcohol abuse counselling and surveillance
     Excludes:
    alcohol rehabilitation procedures (Z50.2)
Z71.5 Drug abuse counselling and surveillance
     Excludes:
    drug rehabilitation procedures (Z50.3)
990
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z71.6 Tobacco abuse counselling
     Excludes:
    tobacco rehabilitation procedures (Z50.8)
Z71.7 Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] counselling
Z71.8 Other specified counselling
     Includes:
    Consanguinity counselling
Z71.9 Counselling, unspecified
     Includes:
    Medical advice NOS
Z72
Z73.6
Problems related to lifestyle
Excludes:
problems related to:
•
life-management difficulty (Z73.-)
•
socioeconomic and psychosocial circumstances (Z55-Z65)
Z72.0 Tobacco use
     Excludes:
    tobacco dependence (F17.2)
Z72.1 Alcohol use
     Excludes:
    alcohol dependence (F10.2)
Z72.2 Drug use
     Excludes:
abuse of non-dependence-producing substances (F55)
drug dependence (F11-F16, F19 with common fourth character .2)
Z72.3 Lack of physical exercise
Z72.4 Inappropriate diet and eating habits
     Excludes:
    behavioural eating disorders of infancy or childhood (F98.2-F98.3)
   eating disorders (F50.-)
  lack of adequate food (Z59.4)
 malnutrition and other nutritional deficiencies (E40-E64)
Z72.5 High-risk sexual behaviour
Z72.6 Gambling and betting
     Excludes:
    compulsive or pathological gambling (F63.0)
Z72.8 Other problems related to lifestyle
     Includes:
    Antisocial behaviour
   Self-damaging behaviour
  Excludes:
 Antisocial personality (F60.2)
Z72.9 Problem related to lifestyle, unspecified
Z73
Problems related to life-management difficulty
Excludes:
problems related to socioeconomic and psychosocial circumstances (Z55-Z65)
Z73.0 Burn-out
     Includes:
State of vital exhaustion
Z73.1 Accentuation of personality traits
     Includes:
    Type A behaviour pattern (characterized by unbridled ambition, a need for high achievement,
   impatience, competitiveness, and a sense of urgency)
Z73.2 Lack of relaxation and leisure
Z73.3 Stress, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Physical and mental strain NOS
   Excludes:
  related to employment or unemployment (Z56.-)
Z73.4 Inadequate social skills, not elsewhere classified
Z73.5 Social role conflict, not elsewhere classified
Z73.6 Limitation of activities due to disability
     Excludes:
    care-provider dependency (Z74.-)
991
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z73.8 
Z73.8
Other problems related to life-management difficulty
Z73.9 Problem related to life-management difficulty, unspecified
Z74
Problems related to care-provider dependency
Excludes:
dependence on enabling machines or devices NEC (Z99.-)
Z74.0 Need for assistance due to reduced mobility
Z74.1 Need for assistance with personal care
Z74.2 Need for assistance at home and no other household member able to render care
Z74.3 Need for continuous supervision
Z74.8 Other problems related to care-provider dependency
Z74.9 Problem related to care-provider dependency, unspecified
Z75
Problems related to medical facilities and other health care
Z75.0 Medical services not available in home
     Excludes:
    no other household member able to render care (Z74.2)
Z75.1 Person awaiting admission to adequate facility elsewhere
Z75.2 Other waiting period for investigation and treatment
Z75.3 Unavailability and inaccessibility of health-care facilities
     Excludes:
    bed unavailable (Z75.1)
Z75.4 Unavailability and inaccessibility of other helping agencies
Z75.5 Holiday relief care
     Includes:
    Provision of health-care facilities to a person normally cared for at home, in order to enable
   relatives to take a vacation.
  Respite care
Z75.8 Other problems related to medical facilities and other health care
Z75.9 Unspecified problem related to medical facilities and other health care
Z76
Persons encountering health services in other circumstances
Z76.0 Issue of repeat prescription
     Includes:
    Issue of repeat prescription for:
   •
    appliance
   •
    medicaments
   •
    spectacles
   Excludes:
  issue of medical certificate (Z02.7)
 repeat prescription for contraceptive (Z30.4)
Z76.1 Health supervision and care of foundling
Z76.2 Health supervision and care of other healthy infant and child
     Includes:
    Medical or nursing care or supervision of healthy infant under circumstances such as:
   •
    adverse socioeconomic conditions at home
   •
    awaiting foster or adoptive placement
   •
    maternal illness
   •
    number of children at home preventing or interfering with normal care
Z76.3 Healthy person accompanying sick person
Z76.4 Other boarder in health-care facility
     Excludes:
    homelessness (Z59.0)
Z76.5 Malingerer [conscious simulation]
     Includes:
    Person feigning illness (with obvious motivation)
   Excludes:
  factitious disorder (F68.1)
 peregrinating patient (F68.1)
992
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z76.8 Persons encountering health services in other specified circumstances
Z76.80o Organ transplant candidate
       Includes: Patient waiting for organ availability
Z76.800o Stem cell transplant candidate
Z76.801o Bone marrow transplant candidate
Z76.802o Kidney transplant candidate
Z76.803o Lung transplant candidate
Z76.804o Liver transplant candidate
Z76.805o Heart transplant candidate
Z76.806o Pancreas transplant candidate
Z76.807o Multiple transplant candidate
        Includes:
       Pancreas with duodenum
      Pancreas with kidney
Z76.808o Other transplant candidate
        Includes:
       Intestine
      Skin
     Trachea
Z76.809o Transplant candidate, organ unspecified
Z76.88o Persons encountering health services in other specified circumstances
Z76.9 Person encountering health services in unspecified circumstances
Z80.48o
Persons with potential health hazards related to family and
personal history and certain conditions influencing health
status
(Z80-Z99)
Excludes:
Z80
follow-up examination (Z08-Z09)
follow-up medical care and convalescence (Z42-Z51, Z54.-)
when family or personal history is the reason for special screening or other examination or investigation
(Z00-Z13)
when the possibility that the fetus might be affected is the reason for observation or action during pregnancy
(O35.-)
Family history of malignant neoplasm
Z80.0 Family history of malignant neoplasm of digestive organs
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to(C15-C26)
Z80.1 Family history of malignant neoplasm of trachea, bronchus and lung
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C33-C34)
Z80.2 Family history of malignant neoplasm of other respiratory and intrathoracic organs
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C30-C32)(C37-C39)
Z80.3 Family history of malignant neoplasm of breast
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C50.-)
Z80.4 Family history of malignant neoplasm of genital organs
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C51-C63)
Z80.40o Family history of malignant neoplasm of ovary
Z80.41o Family history of malignant neoplasm of prostate
Z80.48o Family history of malignant neoplasm of other genital organs
993
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z80.5 
Z80.5
Family history of malignant neoplasm of urinary tract
Includes:
Conditions classifiable to (C64-C68)
Z80.6 Family history of leukaemia
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C91-C95)
Z80.7 Family history of other malignant neoplasms of lymphoid, haematopoietic and related tissues
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C81-C90)(C96.-)
Z80.8 Family history of malignant neoplasm of other organs or systems
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C00-C14)(C40-C49)(C69-C79)(C97)
Z80.9 Family history of malignant neoplasm, unspecified
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C80.-)
Z81
Family history of mental and behavioural disorders
Z81.0 Family history of mental retardation
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to(F70-F79)
Z81.1 Family history of alcohol abuse
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (F10.-)
Z81.2 Family history of tobacco abuse
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (F17.-)
Z81.3 Family history of other psychoactive substance abuse
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (F11-F16)(F18-F19)
Z81.4 Family history of other substance abuse
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (F55)
Z81.8 Family history of other mental and behavioural disorders
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable elsewhere in (F00-F99)
Z82
Family history of certain disabilities and chronic diseases leading to
disablement
Z82.0 Family history of epilepsy and other diseases of the nervous system
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (G00-G99)
Z82.1 Family history of blindness and visual loss
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (H54.-)
Z82.2 Family history of deafness and hearing loss
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (H90-H91)
Z82.3 Family history of stroke
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (I60-I64)
Z82.4 Family history of ischaemic heart disease and other diseases of the circulatory system
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (I00-I52) (I65-I99)
Z82.5 Family history of asthma and other chronic lower respiratory diseases
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (J40-J47)
Z82.6 Family history of arthritis and other diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective
     tissue
    Includes:
   Conditions classifiable to (M00-M99)
Z82.7 Family history of congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (Q00-Q99)
Z82.8 Family history of other disabilities and chronic diseases leading to disablement, not
     elsewhere classified
994
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z83
Family history of other specific disorders
Excludes:
contact with or exposure to communicable disease in the family (Z20.-)
Z83.0 Z83.1 Family history of other infectious and parasitic diseases
           Includes:
          Conditions classifiable to (A00-B19) (B25-B94) (B99)
Z83.2 Family history of diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and certain disorders
     involving the immune mechanism
    Includes:
   Conditions classifiable to (D50-D89)
Z83.3 Family history of diabetes mellitus
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (E10-E14), (O24.-)
Z83.4 Family history of other endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (E00-E07)(E15-E90)
Z83.5 Family history of eye and ear disorders
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (H00-H53)(H55-H83)(H92-H95)
   Excludes:
  family history of:
 •
  blindness and visual loss (Z82.1)
 •
  deafness and hearing loss (Z82.2)
Z83.6 Family history of diseases of the respiratory system
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (J00-J39)(J60-J99)
   Excludes:
  family history of chronic lower respiratory diseases (Z82.5)
Z83.7 
Z85.4
Family history of human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease
Includes:
Conditions classifiable to (B24) (O98.7-)
Family history of diseases of the digestive system
Includes:
Conditions classifiable to (K00-K93)
Z84
Family history of other conditions
Z84.0 Family history of diseases of the skin and subcutaneous tissue
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (L00-L99)
Z84.1 Family history of disorders of kidney and ureter
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (N00-N29)
Z84.2 Family history of other diseases of the genitourinary system
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (N30-N99)
Z84.3 Family history of consanguinity
Z84.8 Family history of other specified conditions
     Includes:
    Family history of malignant hyperthermia
Z85
Personal history of malignant neoplasm
Excludes:
follow-up:
•
examination after treatment of malignant neoplasm (Z08.-)
•
medical care and convalescence (Z42-Z51, Z54.-)
Z85.0 Personal history of malignant neoplasm of digestive organs
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C15-C26)
Z85.1 Personal history of malignant neoplasm of trachea, bronchus and lung
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C33-C34)
Z85.2 Personal history of malignant neoplasm of other respiratory and intrathoracic organs
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C30-C32) (C37-C39)
Z85.3 Personal history of malignant neoplasm of breast
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C50.-)
Z85.4 Personal history of malignant neoplasm of genital organs
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C51-C63)
995
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z85.5 
Z85.5
Personal history of malignant neoplasm of urinary tract
Includes:
Conditions classifiable to (C64-C68)
Z85.6 Personal history of leukaemia
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C91-C95)
Z85.7 Personal history of other malignant neoplasms of lymphoid, haematopoietic and related
     tissues
    Includes:
   Conditions classifiable to (C81-C90) (C96.-)
Z85.8 Personal history of malignant neoplasms of other organs and systems
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C00-C14)(C40-C49)(C69-C76)(C97)
Z85.9 Personal history of malignant neoplasm, unspecified
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (C80.-)
Z86
Personal history of certain other diseases
Excludes:
follow-up medical care and convalescence (Z42-Z51, Z54.-)
Z86.0 Personal history of other neoplasms
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (D00-D48)
   Excludes:
  malignant neoplasms (Z85.-)
Z86.00o Personal history of in-situ neoplasms
Z86.01o Personal history of benign neoplasms
       Includes:
      Personal history of (adenomatous) colonic polyps
Z86.02o Personal history of neoplasms of uncertain or unknown behavior
Z86.1 Personal history of infectious and parasitic diseases
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (A00-B89) (B99)
   Excludes:
  sequelae of infectious and parasitic diseases (B90-B94)
Z86.2 Personal history of diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and certain disorders
     involving the immune mechanism
    Includes:
   Conditions classifiable to (D50-D89)
Z86.3 Personal history of endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (E00-E90)
Z86.4 Personal history of psychoactive substance abuse
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (F10-F19)
   Excludes:
  current dependence (F10-F19 with common fourth character .2)
 problems related to use of:
•
 alcohol (Z72.1)
•
 drug (Z72.2)
•
 tobacco (Z72.0)
Z86.40o Personal history of alcohol abuse
Z86.41o Personal history of drug abuse
Z86.42o Personal history of tobacco use
Z86.48o Personal history of other psychoactive substance abuse
Z86.5 Personal history of other mental and behavioural disorders
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (F00-F09)(F20-F99)
Z86.6 Personal history of diseases of the nervous system and sense organs
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (G00-G99)(H00-H95)
Z86.7 Personal history of diseases of the circulatory system
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (I00-I99)
   Excludes:
  old myocardial infarction (I25.2)
 postmyocardial infarction syndrome (I24.1)
sequelae of cerebrovascular disease (I69.-)
996
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z86.70o Personal history of thromboembolic disease
       Includes:
      Conditions classifiable to (I80-I82)
Z86.78o Personal history of other diseases of the circulatory system
Z87 Personal history of other diseases and conditions
Excludes:
Z88.9
follow-up medical care and convalescence (Z42-Z51, Z54.-)
Z87.0 Personal history of diseases of the respiratory system
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (J00-J99)
Z87.1 Personal history of diseases of the digestive system
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (K00-K93)
Z87.10o Personal history of peptic ulcer disease
Z87.18o Personal history of other diseases of the digestive system
Z87.2 Personal history of diseases of the skin and subcutaneous tissue
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (L00-L99)
Z87.3 Personal history of diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective tissue
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (M00-M99)
Z87.4 Personal history of diseases of the genitourinary system
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (N00-N99)
Z87.5 Personal history of complications of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (O00-O99)
   Personal history of trophoblastic disease
  Excludes:
 habitual aborter (N96)
supervision during current pregnancy of a woman with poor obstetric history (Z35.-)
Z87.6 Personal history of certain conditions arising in the perinatal period
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (P00-P96)
Z87.7 Personal history of congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (Q00-Q99)
Z87.8 Personal history of other specified conditions
     Includes:
    Conditions classifiable to (S00-T98)
   Personal history of sex reassignment surgery
  Excludes:
 personal history of self harm (Z91.5)
Z88
Personal history of allergy to drugs, medicaments and biological substances
Z88.0 Personal history of allergy to penicillin
Z88.1 Personal history of allergy to other antibiotic agents
Z88.2 Personal history of allergy to sulfonamides
Z88.3 Personal history of allergy to other anti-infective agents
Z88.4 Personal history of allergy to anaesthetic agent
     Includes:
    personal history of malignant hyperthermia
Z88.5 Personal history of allergy to narcotic agent
Z88.6 Personal history of allergy to analgesic agent
Z88.7 Personal history of allergy to serum and vaccine
Z88.8 Personal history of allergy to other drugs, medicaments and biological substances
     Includes:
    Multiple drug allergies
Z88.9 Personal history of allergy to unspecified drugs, medicaments and biological substances
997
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z89
Acquired absence of limb
Includes:
Z89
Excludes:
loss of limb:
•
post-traumatic
•
postoperative
acquired deformities of limbs (M20-M21)
congenital absence of limbs (Q71-Q73)
Z89.0 Acquired absence of finger(s) [including thumb], unilateral
Z89.1 Acquired absence of hand and wrist
Z89.2 Acquired absence of upper limb above wrist
     Includes:
    Arm NOS
Z89.3 Acquired absence of both upper limbs [any level]
     Includes:
    Acquired absence of finger(s), bilateral
Z89.4 Acquired absence of foot and ankle
     Includes:
    Toe(s)
Z89.5 Acquired absence of leg at or below knee
Z89.6 Acquired absence of leg above knee
     Includes:
    Leg NOS
Z89.7 Acquired absence of both lower limbs [any level, except toes alone]
Z89.8 Acquired absence of upper and lower limbs [any level]
Z89.9 Acquired absence of limb, unspecified
Z90
Acquired absence of organs, not elsewhere classified
Includes:
Excludes:
postoperative or post-traumatic loss of body part NEC
congenital absence - see Alphabetical Index
postoperative absence of:
•
endocrine glands (E89.-)
•
spleen (D73.0)
Z90.0 Acquired absence of part of head and neck
     Includes:
    Eye
   Larynx
  Nose
 Excludes:
teeth (K08.1)
Z90.1 Acquired absence of breast(s)
Z90.2 Acquired absence of lung [part of]
Z90.3 Acquired absence of part of stomach
Z90.4 Acquired absence of other parts of digestive tract
Z90.5 Acquired absence of kidney
Z90.6 Acquired absence of other organs of urinary tract
Z90.7 Acquired absence of genital organ(s)
Z90.8 Acquired absence of other organs
Z91
Personal history of risk-factors, not elsewhere classified
Excludes:
exposure to pollution and other problems related to physical environment (Z58.-)
occupational exposure to risk-factors (Z57.-)
personal history of psychoactive substance abuse (Z86.4)
Z91.0 Personal history of allergy, other than to drugs and biological substances
     Excludes:
    personal history of allergy to drugs and biological substances (Z88.-)
Z91.1 Personal history of noncompliance with medical treatment and regimen
Z91.2 Personal history of poor personal hygiene
998
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z91.3 Personal history of unhealthy sleep-wake schedule
     Excludes:
    sleep disorders (G47.-)
Z91.4 Personal history of psychological trauma, not elsewhere classified
Z91.5 Personal history of self-harm
     Includes:
    Parasuicide
   Self-poisoning
  Suicide attempt
Z91.6 Personal history of other physical trauma
Z91.8 Personal history of other specified risk-factors, not elsewhere classified
     Includes:
    Abuse NOS
   Maltreatment NOS
Z92
Z93.5
Personal history of medical treatment
Z92.0 Personal history of contraception
     Excludes:
    counselling or management of current contraceptive practices (Z30.-)
   presence of (intrauterine) contraceptive device (Z97.5)
Z92.1 Personal history of long-term (current) use of anticoagulants
Z92.2 Personal history of long-term (current) use of other medicaments
Z92.20o Personal history of long-term (current) use of antibiotics
Z92.21o Personal history of long-term (current) use of postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy
Z92.22o Personal history of long-term (current) use of multiple prescription drugs [polypharmacy]
Z92.28o Personal history of long-term (current) use of other drug therapy
       Includes:
      Aspirin
Z92.3 Personal history of irradiation
     Includes:
    Therapeutic radiation
   Excludes:
  exposure to radiation in the physical environment (Z58.4)
 occupational exposure to radiation (Z57.1)
Z92.4 Personal history of major surgery, not elsewhere classified
     Excludes:
    artificial opening status (Z93.-)
   postsurgical states (Z98.-)
  presence of functional implants and grafts (Z95-Z96)
 transplanted organ or tissue status (Z94.-)
Z92.5 Personal history of rehabilitation measures
Z92.6 Personal history of chemotherapy for neoplastic disease
Z92.8 Personal history of other medical treatment
Z92.9 Personal history of medical treatment, unspecified
Z93
Artificial opening status
Excludes:
artificial openings requiring attention or management (Z43.-)
complications of external stoma (J95.0), (K91.4),(N99.5)
Z93.0 Tracheostomy status
Z93.1 Gastrostomy status
Z93.2 Ileostomy status
Z93.3 Colostomy status
Z93.4 Other artificial openings of gastrointestinal tract status
Z93.5 Cystostomy status
999
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z93.6 Other artificial openings of urinary tract status
     Includes:
    Nephrostomy
   Ureterostomy
  Urethrostomy
Z93.8 Other artificial opening status
Z93.9 Artificial opening status, unspecified
Z93.6
Z94
Transplanted organ and tissue status
Includes:
Excludes:
organ or tissue replaced by heterogenous or homogenous transplant
complications of transplanted organ or tissue - see Alphabetical Index
presence of:
•
vascular graft (Z95.-)
•
xenogenic heart valve (Z95.3)
Z94.0 Kidney transplant status
Z94.1 Heart transplant status
     Excludes:
    heart-valve replacement status (Z95.2-Z95.4)
Z94.2 Lung transplant status
Z94.3 Heart and lungs transplant status
Z94.4 Liver transplant status
Z94.5 Skin transplant status
     Includes:
    Autogenous skin transplant status
Z94.6 Bone transplant status
Z94.7 Corneal transplant status
Z94.8 Other transplanted organ and tissue status
Z94.80o Bone marrow transplant status
Z94.81o Intestine transplant status
Z94.82o Pancreas transplant status
Z94.83o Stem cell transplant status
Z94.88o Other transplanted organ and tissue status
Z94.9 Transplanted organ and tissue status, unspecified
Z95
Presence of cardiac and vascular implants and grafts
Excludes:
complications of cardiac and vascular devices, implants and grafts (T82.-)
Z95.0 Presence of cardiac pacemaker
     Excludes:
    adjustment or management of cardiac pacemaker (Z45.0)
Z95.1 Presence of aortocoronary bypass graft
Z95.2 Presence of prosthetic heart valve
Z95.3 Presence of xenogenic heart valve
Z95.4 Presence of other heart-valve replacement
Z95.5 Presence of coronary angioplasty implant and graft
     Includes:
    Presence of coronary artery prosthesis
   Status following coronary angioplasty NOS
Z95.8 Presence of other cardiac and vascular implants and grafts
     Includes:
    Presence of intravascular prosthesis NEC
   Status following peripheral angioplasty NOS
Z95.9 Presence of cardiac and vascular implant and graft, unspecified
1000
FACTORS INFLUENCING HEALTH STATUS AND CONTACT WITH HEALTH SERVICES (Z00-Z99)
Z96
Presence of other functional implants
Excludes:
complications of internal prosthetic devices, implants and grafts (T82-T85)
fitting and adjustment of prosthetic and other devices (Z44-Z46)
Z96.0 Presence of urogenital implants
Z96.1 Presence of intraocular lens
     Includes:
    Pseudophakia
Z96.2 Presence of otological and audiological implants
     Includes:
    Bone-conduction hearing device
   Cochlear implant
  Eustachian tube stent
 Myringotomy tube(s)
Stapes replacement
Z96.3 Presence of artificial larynx
Z96.4 Presence of endocrine implants
     Includes:
    Insulin pump
Z96.5 Presence of tooth-root and mandibular implants
     Includes:
    Maxillary implant
Z96.6 Presence of orthopaedic joint implants
Z96.60o Presence of artificial hip
       Includes:
      Hip joint replacement (partial)(total)
Z96.61o Presence of artificial knee
Z96.68o Presence of other orthopaedic joint implants
       Includes:
      Finger-joint replacement
Z96.69o Presence of orthopaedic joint implants unspecified
Z96.7 Presence of other bone and tendon implants
     Includes:
    Skull plate
Z96.8 Presence of other specified functional implants
Z96.9 
Z97.8
Presence of functional implant, unspecified
Z97
Presence of other devices
Excludes:
complications of internal prosthetic devices, implants and grafts (T82-T85)
fitting and adjustment of prosthetic and other devices (Z44-Z46)
presence of cerebrospinal fluid drainage device (Z98.2)
Z97.0 Presence of artificial eye
Z97.1 Presence of artificial limb (complete)(partial)
Z97.2 Presence of dental prosthetic device (complete)(partial)
Z97.3 Presence of spectacles and contact lenses
Z97.4 Presence of external hearing-aid
Z97.5 Presence of (intrauterine) contraceptive device
     Excludes:
    checking, reinsertion or removal of contraceptive device (Z30.5)
   insertion of contraceptive device (Z30.1)
Z97.8 Presence of other specified devices
1001
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z98
Other postsurgical states
Excludes:
Z98
follow-up medical care and convalescence (Z42-Z51,Z54.-)
postprocedural or postoperative complication - see Alphabetical Index
Z98.0 Intestinal bypass and anastomosis status
Z98.1 Arthrodesis status
Z98.2 Presence of cerebrospinal fluid drainage device
     Includes:
    CSF shunt
Z98.8 Other specified postsurgical states
Z99
Dependence on enabling machines and devices, not elsewhere classified
Z99.0 Dependence on aspirator
Z99.1 Dependence on respirator
     Includes:
    Dependence on ventilator
Z99.2 Dependence on renal dialysis
     Includes:
    Presence of arteriovenous shunt for dialysis
   Renal dialysis status
  Excludes:
 dialysis preparation, treatment or session (Z49.-)
Z99.3 Dependence on wheelchair
Z99.8 Dependence on other enabling machines and devices
Z99.9 Dependence on unspecified enabling machine and device
1002
I
CHAPTER XXII
Morphology of Neoplasms
Note:
The second edition of the International Classification of Diseases for Oncology (ICD-O) was published in 1990.
It contains a coded nomenclature for the morphology of neoplasms, which is reproduced here for those who
wish to use it in conjunction with Chapter II.
The morphology code numbers consist of five digits; the first four identify the histological type of the neoplasm
and the fifth, following a slash or solidus, indicates its behaviour. The one-digit behaviour code is as follows:
/0
/1
/2
/3
/6
/9
Benign
Uncertain whether benign or malignant
Borderline malignancy
Low malignant potential
Carcinoma in situ
Intraepithelial
Non-infiltrating
Non-invasive
Malignant, primary site
Malignant, metastatic site
Malignant, secondary site
Malignant, uncertain whether primary or metastatic site
In the nomenclature given here, the morphology code numbers include the behaviour code appropriate to the
histological type of neoplasm.
The following table shows the correspondence between the behaviour code and the different sections of
Chapter II:
Behaviour code
Chapter II categories
/0 Benign neoplasms D10-D36
/1 Neoplasms of uncertain or unkown behaviour D37-D48
/2 In situ neoplasms D00-D09
/3 Malignant neoplasms, stated or presumed to be C00-C76
   primary 
Malignant neoplasms, stated or presumed to be C77-C79
secondary 
C80-C97
/6
The ICD-O behaviour digit /9 is not applicable in the ICD context, since all malignant neoplasms are presumed
to be primary (/3) or secondary (/6), according to other information on the medical record.
Only the first-listed term of the full ICD-O morphology nomenclature appears against each code number in the
list given here. The Alphabetical Index however, includes all the ICD-O synonyms as well as a number of other
morphological descriptions still likely to be encountered on medical records but omitted from ICD-O as
outdated or otherwise undesirable.
Some types of neoplasm are specific to certain sites or types of tissue. For example, nephroblastoma (9860/3),
by definition, always arises in the kidney; hepatocellular carcinoma (8170/3) is always primary in the liver; and
basal cell carcinoma (8090/3) usually arises in the skin. For such terms the appropriate code from Chapter II
has been added in parentheses in the nomenclature. Thus nephroblastoma is followed by the code for malignant
neoplasm of kidney (C64). For basal cell carcinoma the code for malignant neoplasm of skin (C44.-) is given
with the fourth character left open. The appropriate fourth character for the reported site should be used. The
Chapter II codes assigned to the morphologic terms should be used when the site of the neoplasm is not given
in the diagnosis. Chapter II codes have not been assigned to many of the morphology terms because the
histologic types can arise in more than one organ or type of tissue. For example, "Adenocarcinoma NOS"
(8140/3) has no assigned chapter II code because it can be primary in many different organs.
1003
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Occasionally a problem arises when a site given in a diagnosis is different from the site indicated by the site-
specific code. In such instances, the given Chapter II code should be ignored and the appropriate code for the
site included in the diagnosis should be used. For example, C50.- (breast) is added to the morphologic term
Infiltrating duct carcinoma (8500/3), because this type of carcinoma usually arises in the breast. However, if
the term "Infiltrating duct carcinoma" is used for a primary carcinoma arising in the pancreas, the correct code
would be C25.9 (Pancreas, unspecified).
For neoplasms of lymphoid, haematopoietic and related tissue (959-998) the relevant codes from C81-C96 and
D45-D47 are given. These Chapter II codes should be used irrespective of the stated site of the neoplasm.
A coding difficulty sometimes arises where a morphological diagnosis contains two qualifying adjectives that
have different code numbers. An example is "transitional cell epidermoid carcinoma". "Transitional cell
carcinoma NOS" is 8120/3 and "epidermoid carcinoma NOS" is 8070/3. In such circumstances, the higher
number (8120/3 in this example) should be used, as it is usually more specific.
Numerical List for Morphology of Neoplasms
800 Neoplasms NOS 8043/3 Small cell carcinoma, fusiform cell
                        (C34.-)
8000/0 Neoplasm, benign 8044/3 8000/1 Neoplasm, uncertain whether benign Small cell carcinoma, intermediate cell
                                      or malignant (C34.-)
8045/3 Small cell-large cell carcinoma (C34.-)
8000/3 Neoplasm, malignant 8000/6 Neoplasm, metastatic 805-808 Squamous cell neoplasms
8001/0 Tumour cells, benign 8050/0 8001/1 Tumour cells, uncertain whether Papilloma NOS (except Papilloma of
                                          benign or malignant urinary bladder (8120/1))
8050/2 Papillary carcinoma in situ
8001/3 Tumour cells, malignant 8050/3 Papillary carcinoma NOS
8002/3 Malignant tumour, small cell type 8051/0 Verrucous papilloma
8003/3 Malignant tumour, giant cell type 8051/3 Verrucous carcinoma NOS
8004/3 Malignant tumour, fusiform cell type 8052/0 Squamous cell papilloma
801-804 Epithelial neoplasms NOS 8052/3 Papillary squamous cell carcinoma
8053/0 Inverted papilloma
8010/0 Epithelial tumour, benign 8060/0 Papillomatosis NOS
8010/2 Carcinoma in situ NOS 8070/2 Squamous cell carcinoma in situ NOS
8010/3 Carcinoma NOS 8070/3 Squamous cell carcinoma NOS
8010/6 Carcinoma, metastatic NOS 8070/6 8011/0 Epithelioma, benign Squamous cell carcinoma, metastatic
                                                                  NOS
8011/3 Epithelioma, malignant 8071/3 8012/3 Large cell carcinoma NOS Squamous cell carcinoma, keratinizing
                                                                    NOS
8020/3 Carcinoma, undifferentiated NOS 8072/3 8021/3 Carcinoma, anaplastic NOS Squamous cell carcinoma, large cell,
                                                                              nonkeratinizing
8022/3 Pleomorphic carcinoma 8073/3 Squamous cell carcinoma, small cell,
                                   nonkeratinizing
8030/3 Giant cell and spindle cell carcinoma 8074/3 Squamous cell carcinoma, spindle cell
8031/3 Giant cell carcinoma 8075/3 Adenoid squamous cell carcinoma
8032/3 Spindle cell carcinoma 8076/2 8033/3 Pseudosarcomatous carcinoma Squamous cell carcinoma in situ with
                                                                       questionable stromal invasion (D06.-)
8034/3 Polygonal cell carcinoma 8076/3 8040/1 Tumorlet Squamous cell carcinoma,
                                                      microinvasive (C53.-)
8041/3 Small cell carcinoma NOS 8077/2 Intraepithelial neoplasia, grade III, of
                                      cervix, vulva and vagina
8042/3 Oat cell carcinoma (C34.-) 8080/2 Queyrat's erythroplasia (D07.4)
8081/2 Bowen's disease
1004
MORPHOLOGY OF NEOPLASMS
8082/3
Lymphoepithelial carcinoma
8150/0 Islet cell adenoma (D13.7)
8150/3 Islet cell carcinoma (C25.4)
809-811 Basal cell neoplasms 8151/0 Insulinoma NOS (D13.7)
8090/1 Basal cell tumour (D48.5) 8151/3 Insulinoma, malignant (C25.4)
8090/3 Basal cell carcinoma NOS (C44.-) 8152/0 Glucagonoma NOS (D13.7)
8091/3 Multicentric basal cell carcinoma (C44.-) 8152/3 Glucagonoma, malignant (C25.4)
8092/3 Basal cell carcinoma, morphoea (C44.-) 8153/1 Gastrinoma NOS
8093/3 Basal cell carcinoma, fibroepithelial 8153/3 Gastrinoma, malignant
       (C44.-) 
8094/3 Basosquamous carcinoma (C44.-) 8154/3 Mixed islet cell and exocrine
                                            adenocarcinoma (C25.-)
8095/3 Metatypical carcinoma (C44.-) 8155/3 Vipoma
8096/0 Intraepidermal epithelioma of 8160/0 Bile duct adenoma (D13.4, D13.5)
       Jadassohn (D23.-) 
8100/0 Trichoepithelioma (D23.-) 8160/3 Cholangiocarcinoma (C22.1)
8161/0 Bile duct cystadenoma
8161/3 Bile duct cystadenocarcinoma
8162/3 Klatskin's tumour (C22.1)
8170/0 Liver cell adenoma (D13.4)
8170/3 Hepatocellular carcinoma NOS (C22.0)
8101/0 Trichofolliculoma (D23.-)
8102/0 Tricholemmoma (D23.-)
8110/0 Pilomatrixoma NOS (D23.-)
8110/3 Pilomatrix carcinoma (C44.-)
812-813 Transitional cell papillomas and 8171/3 Hepatocellular carcinoma,
        carcinomas fibrolamellar (C22.0)
8120/0 Transitional cell papilloma NOS 8180/3 8120/1 Urothelial papilloma Combined hepatocellular carcinoma
                                                                         and cholangiocarcinoma (C22.0)
8120/2 Transitional cell carcinoma in situ 8190/0 Trabecular adenoma
8190/3 Trabecular adenocarcinoma
8191/0 Embryonal adenoma
8200/0 Eccrine dermal cylindroma (D23.-)
8200/3 Adenoid cystic carcinoma
8201/3 Cribriform carcinoma
8202/0 Microcystic adenoma (D13.7)
Adenomatous polyp NOS
8120/3 Transitional cell carcinoma NOS
8121/0 Schneiderian papilloma
8121/1 Transitional cell papilloma, inverted
8121/3 Schneiderian carcinoma
8122/3
Transitional cell carcinoma, spindle
cell
8123/3 Basaloid carcinoma (C21.1) 8210/0 8124/3 Cloacogenic carcinoma (C21.2) 8210/2 8130/3 Papillary transitional cell carcinoma Adenocarcinoma in situ in
                                                                                                                                 adenomatous polyp
8210/3 814-838 Adenomas and adenocarcinomas Adenocarcinoma in adenomatous
                                           polyp
8140/0 Adenoma NOS 8211/0 Tubular adenoma NOS
8140/1 Bronchial adenoma NOS (D38.1) 8211/3 Tubular adenocarcinoma
8140/2 Adenocarcinoma in situ NOS 8220/0 Adenomatous polyposis coli (D12.-)
8140/3 Adenocarcinoma NOS 8220/3 8140/6 Adenocarcinoma in adenomatous
                                       polyposis coli (C18.-)
Adenocarcinoma, metastatic NOS 8141/3 8221/0 Multiple adenomatous polyps
Scirrhous adenocarcinoma 8142/3 8221/3 Linitis plastica (C16.-) Adenocarcinoma in multiple
                                                               adenomatous polyps
8143/3 Superficial spreading adenocarcinoma 8230/3 Solid carcinoma NOS
8144/3 Adenocarcinoma, intestinal type (C16.-) 8231/3 Carcinoma simplex
8145/3 Carcinoma, diffuse type (C16.-) 8240/1 8146/0 Monomorphic adenoma Carcinoid tumour NOS, of appendix
                                                                        (D37.3)
8147/0 Basal cell adenoma (D11.-) 8240/3 8147/3 Basal cell adenocarcinoma (C07.-, Carcinoid tumour NOS (except of
                                                C08.-) appendix (8240/1))
8241/1 Carcinoid tumour, argentaffin NOS
1005
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
8241/3 Carcinoid tumour, argentaffin, 8322/3 Water-clear cell adenocarcinoma
       malignant (C75.0)
8243/3 Goblet cell carcinoid (C18.1) 8323/0 Mixed cell adenoma
8244/3 Composite carcinoid 8323/3 Mixed cell adenocarcinoma
8245/3 Adenocarcinoid tumour 8324/0 Lipoadenoma
8246/3 Neuroendocrine carcinoma 8330/0 Follicular adenoma (D34)
8247/3 Merkel cell carcinoma (C44.-) 8330/3 Follicular adenocarcinoma NOS (C73)
8248/1 Apudoma 8331/3 8250/1 Pulmonary adenomatosis (D38.1) Follicular adenocarcinoma, well
                                                           differentiated (C73)
8250/3 Bronchiolo-alveolar adenocarcinoma 8332/3 Follicular adenocarcinoma, trabecular
       (C34.-) (C73)
8251/0 Alveolar adenoma (D14.3) 8333/0 Microfollicular adenoma (D34)
8251/3 Alveolar adenocarcinoma (C34.-) 8334/0 Macrofollicular adenoma (D34)
8260/0 Papillary adenoma NOS 8340/3 8260/3 Papillary carcinoma, follicular variant
                                          (C73)
Papillary adenocarcinoma NOS 8261/1 8350/3 Villous adenoma NOS Nonencapsulated sclerosing
                                                              carcinoma (C73)
8261/2 Adenocarcinoma in situ in villous 8360/1 Multiple endocrine adenomas
       adenoma 
8261/3 8361/1 Juxtaglomerular tumour (D41.0)
Adenocarcinoma in villous adenoma 8262/3 8370/0 Adrenal cortical adenoma NOS (D35.0)
Villous adenocarcinoma 8263/0 8370/3 Adrenal cortical carcinoma (C74.0)
Tubulovillous adenoma NOS 8263/2 8371/0 Adenocarcinoma in situ in Adrenal cortical adenoma, compact
                                        tubulovillous adenoma cell (D35.0)
8263/3 8372/0 Adenocarcinoma in tubulovillous Adrenal cortical adenoma, heavily
              adenoma pigmented variant (D35.0)
8270/0 8373/0 Chromophobe adenoma (D35.2) Adrenal cortical adenoma, clear cell
                                         (D35.0)
8270/3 Chromophobe carcinoma (C75.1) 8374/0 8271/0 Prolactinoma (D35.2) Adrenal cortical adenoma,
                                                                       glomerulosa cell (D35.0)
8280/0 Acidophil adenoma (D35.2) 8375/0 8280/3 Acidophil carcinoma (C75.1) Adrenal cortical adenoma, mixed cell
                                                                          (D35.0)
8281/0 Mixed acidophil-basophil adenoma 8380/0 Endometrioid adenoma NOS (D27)
       (D35.2) 
8380/1 Mixed acidophil-basophil carcinoma Endometrioid adenoma, borderline
       (C75.1) malignancy (D39.1)
8380/3 Endometrioid carcinoma (C56)
8290/0 Oxyphilic adenoma 8381/0 Endometrioid adenofibroma NOS (D27)
8290/3 Oxyphilic adenocarcinoma 8381/1 8300/0 Basophil adenoma (D35.2) Endometrioid adenofibroma,
                                                                      borderline malignancy (D39.1)
8300/3 Basophil carcinoma (C75.1) 8381/3 Endometrioid adenofibroma, malignant
                                        (C56)
8310/0 Clear cell adenoma 8310/3 Clear cell adenocarcinoma NOS 839-842 8311/1 Adnexal and skin appendage
                                                                             neoplasms
Hypernephroid tumour 8312/3 Renal cell carcinoma (C64) 8390/0 Skin appendage adenoma (D23.-)
8313/0 Clear cell adenofibroma 8390/3 Skin appendage carcinoma (C44.-)
8314/3 Lipid-rich carcinoma (C50.-) 8400/0 Sweat gland adenoma (D23.-)
8315/3 Glycogen-rich carcinoma (C50.-) 8400/1 Sweat gland tumour NOS (D48.5)
8320/3 Granular cell carcinoma 8400/3 Sweat gland adenocarcinoma (C44.-)
8321/0 Chief cell adenoma (D35.1) 8401/0 Apocrine adenoma
Water-clear cell adenoma (D35.1) 8401/3 Apocrine adenocarcinoma
8402/0 Eccrine acrospiroma (D23.-)
8281/3
8322/0
1006
MORPHOLOGY OF NEOPLASMS
8403/0 Eccrine spiradenoma (D23.-) 8480/3 Mucinous adenocarcinoma
8404/0 Hidrocystoma (D23.-) 8480/6 8405/0 Papillary hidradenoma (D23.-) Mucinous adenocarcinoma, metastatic
                                                                       [Pseudomyxoma peritonei] C78.6
8406/0 Papillary syringadenoma (D23.-) 8481/3 Mucin-producing adenocarcinoma
8407/0 Syringoma NOS (D23.-) 8490/3 Signet ring cell carcinoma
8408/0 Eccrine papillary adenoma (D23.-) 8490/6 Metastatic signet ring cell carcinoma
8410/0 Sebaceous adenoma (D23.-) 850-854 8410/3 Sebaceous adenocarcinoma (C44.-) Ductal, lobular and medullary
                                                                                neoplasms
8420/0 Ceruminous adenoma (D23.2) 8500/2 8420/3 Ceruminous adenocarcinoma (C44.2) Intraductal carcinoma, noninfiltrating
                                                                                 NOS
843 Mucoepidermoid neoplasms 8500/3 Infiltrating duct carcinoma (C50.-)
8501/2 8430/1 Mucoepidermoid tumour Comedocarcinoma, noninfiltrating
                                   (D05.-)
8430/3 Mucoepidermoid carcinoma 8501/3 Comedocarcinoma NOS (C50.-)
8502/3 Juvenile carcinoma of breast (C50.-)
8503/0 Intraductal papilloma
8503/2 Noninfiltrating intraductal papillary
      adenocarcinoma (D05.-)
8503/3 Intraductal papillary adenocarcinoma
      with invasion (C50.-)
844-849
Cystic, mucinous and serous
neoplasms
8440/0 Cystadenoma NOS 8440/3 Cystadenocarcinoma NOS 8441/0 Serous cystadenoma NOS (D27) 8441/3 Serous cystadenocarcinoma NOS 8504/0 Intracystic papillary adenoma
                                                                                                (C56) 
8504/2 Noninfiltrating intracystic carcinoma
8442/3 Serous cystadenoma, borderline 8504/3 Intracystic carcinoma NOS
       malignancy (C56) 
8450/0 Papillary cystadenoma NOS (D27) 8505/0 Intraductal papillomatosis NOS
8450/3 Papillary cystadenocarcinoma NOS 8506/0 Adenoma of nipple (D24)
       (C56) 
8510/3 Medullary carcinoma NOS
8511/3 Medullary carcinoma with amyloid
      stroma (C73)
8451/3 Papillary cystadenoma, borderline 8452/1 Papillary cystic tumour (D37.7) 8512/3 8460/0 Papillary serous cystadenoma NOS Medullary carcinoma with lymphoid
       malignancy (C56) (D27) stroma (C50.-)
8520/2 Lobular carcinoma in situ (D05.0)
8460/3 Papillary serous cystadenocarcinoma 8520/3 Lobular carcinoma NOS (C50.-)
       (C56) 
8521/3 Infiltrating ductular carcinoma (C50.-)
8461/0 Serous surface papilloma (D27) 8522/2 8461/3 Serous surface papillary carcinoma Intraductal carcinoma and lobular
                                                    (C56) carcinoma in situ (D05.7)
8522/3 8462/3 Papillary serous cystadenoma, Infiltrating duct and lobular carcinoma
              borderline malignancy (C56) (C50.-)
8530/3 Inflammatory carcinoma (C50.-)
8470/0 Mucinous cystadenoma NOS (D27) 8540/3 Paget's disease, mammary (C50.-)
8470/3 Mucinous cystadenocarcinoma NOS 8541/3 Paget's disease and infiltrating duct
       (C56) carcinoma of breast (C50.-)
8471/0 Papillary mucinous cystadenoma NOS 8542/3 Paget's disease, extramammary
       (D27) (except Paget's disease of bone)
8471/3 Papillary mucinous 8543/3 Paget's disease and intraductal
       cystadenocarcinoma (C56) carcinoma of breast (C50.-)
8472/3 Mucinous cystadenoma, borderline 855 Acinar cell neoplasms
       malignancy (C56) 
8473/3 Papillary mucinous cystadenoma, 8550/0 Acinar cell adenoma
       borderline malignancy (C56) 
8550/1 Acinar cell tumour
Mucinous adenoma 8550/3 Acinar cell carcinoma
8480/0
1007
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
856-858
Complex epithelial neoplasms
8560/3 Adenosquamous carcinoma
8561/0 Adenolymphoma (D11.-)
8562/3 Epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma
8570/3 Adenocarcinoma with squamous
      metaplasia
8571/3
Adenocarcinoma with cartilaginous
and osseous metaplasia
8681/1 Sympathetic paraganglioma
8682/1 Parasympathetic paraganglioma
8683/0 Gangliocytic paraganglioma (D13.2)
8690/1 Glomus jugulare tumour (D44.7)
8691/1 Aortic body tumour (D44.7)
8692/1 Carotid body tumour (D44.6)
8693/1 Extra-adrenal paraganglioma NOS
8693/3 Extra-adrenal paraganglioma,
      malignant
8572/3 Adenocarcinoma with spindle cell 8700/0 Phaeochromocytoma NOS (D35.0)
       metaplasia 
8573/3 Adenocarcinoma with apocrine 8700/3 Phaeochromocytoma, malignant
       metaplasia (C74.1)
8580/0 Thymoma, benign (D15.0) 8710/3 Glomangiosarcoma
8580/3 Thymoma, malignant (C37) 8711/0 Glomus tumour
859-867 Specialized gonadal neoplasms 8712/0 Glomangioma
8713/0 Glomangiomyoma
8590/1 Sex cord-stromal tumour 8600/0 Thecoma NOS (D27) 872-879 Naevi and melanomas
8600/3 Thecoma, malignant (C56) 8720/0 Pigmented naevus NOS (D22.-)
8601/0 Thecoma, luteinized (D27) 8720/2 Melanoma in situ (D03.-)
8602/0 Sclerosing stromal tumour (D27) 8720/3 Malignant melanoma NOS
8610/0 Luteoma NOS (D27) 8721/3 Nodular melanoma (C43.-)
8620/1 Granulosa cell tumour NOS (D39.1) 8722/0 Balloon cell naevus (D22.-)
8620/3 Granulosa cell tumour, malignant (C56) 8722/3 Balloon cell melanoma (C43.-)
8621/1 Granulosa cell-theca cell tumour 8723/0 Halo naevus (D22.-)
       (D39.1) 
8723/3 Malignant melanoma, regressing (C43.-)
8724/0 Fibrous papule of nose (D22.3)
8725/0 Neuronaevus (D22.-)
8622/1 Juvenile granulosa cell tumour (D39.1) 8623/1 Sex cord tumour with annular tubules 8630/0 Androblastoma, benign 8726/0 Magnocellular naevus (D31.4)
                                                     (D39.1) 
8630/1 Androblastoma NOS 8727/0 Dysplastic naevus (D22.-)
8630/3 Androblastoma, malignant 8730/0 Nonpigmented naevus (D22.-)
8631/0 Sertoli-Leydig cell tumour 8730/3 Amelanotic melanoma (C43.-)
8632/1 Gynandroblastoma (D39.1) 8740/0 Junctional naevus NOS (D22.-)
8640/0 Sertoli cell tumour NOS 8740/3 8640/3 Sertoli cell carcinoma (C62.-) Malignant melanoma in junctional
                                                                           naevus (C43.-)
8641/0 Sertoli cell tumour with lipid storage 8741/2 Precancerous melanosis NOS (D03.-)
       (D27) 
8741/3 8650/0 Leydig cell tumour, benign (D29.2) Malignant melanoma in precancerous
                                                melanosis (C43.-)
8650/1 Leydig cell tumour NOS (D40.1) 8742/2 Hutchinson's melanotic freckle NOS
                                            (D03.-)
8650/3 Leydig cell tumour, malignant (C62.-) 8742/3 8660/0 Hilus cell tumour (D27) Malignant melanoma in Hutchinson's
                                                                                  melanotic freckle (C43.-)
8670/0 Lipid cell tumour of ovary (D27) 8743/3 Superficial spreading melanoma (C43.-)
8671/0 Adrenal rest tumour 8744/3 Acral lentiginous melanoma, malignant
                                 (C43.-)
868-871 Paragangliomas and glomus 8745/3 Desmoplastic melanoma, malignant
        tumours (C43.-)
8680/1 Paraganglioma NOS 8750/0 Intradermal naevus (D22.-)
8680/3 Paraganglioma, malignant 8760/0 Compound naevus (D22.-)
1008
MORPHOLOGY OF NEOPLASMS
8761/1 Giant pigmented naevus NOS (D48.5)
8761/3 Malignant melanoma in giant
      pigmented naevus (C43.-)
8833/3 Pigmented dermatofibrosarcoma
      protuberans
8770/0 Epithelioid and spindle cell naevus
      (D22.-)
884 Myxomatous neoplasms
8770/3 Mixed epithelioid and spindle cell
      melanoma
8840/0 Myxoma NOS
8840/3 Myxosarcoma
8771/0 Epithelioid cell naevus (D22.-)
8841/1 Angiomyxoma
8771/3 Epithelioid cell melanoma
885-888 Lipomatous neoplasms
8772/0 Spindle cell naevus (D22.-) 8850/0 Lipoma NOS (D17.-)
8772/3 Spindle cell melanoma NOS 8850/3 Liposarcoma NOS
8773/3 Spindle cell melanoma, type A (C69.4) 8851/0 Fibrolipoma (D17.-)
8774/3 Spindle cell melanoma, type B (C69.4) 8851/3 Liposarcoma, well differentiated
8780/0 Blue naevus NOS (D22.-) 8852/0 Fibromyxolipoma (D17.-)
8780/3 Blue naevus, malignant (C43.-) 8852/3 Myxoid liposarcoma
8790/0 Cellular blue naevus (D22.-) 8853/3 Round cell liposarcoma
8854/0 Pleomorphic lipoma (D17.-)
8854/3 Pleomorphic liposarcoma
8855/3 Mixed liposarcoma
8856/0 Intramuscular lipoma (D17.-)
8857/0 Spindle cell lipoma (D17.-)
8858/3 Dedifferentiated liposarcoma
8860/0 Angiomyolipoma (D17.-)
880
Soft tissue tumours and sarcomas
NOS
8800/0 Soft tissue tumour, benign 8800/3 Sarcoma NOS 8800/6 Sarcomatosis NOS 8801/3 Spindle cell sarcoma 8802/3 Giant cell sarcoma (except of bone 8861/0 Angiolipoma NOS (D17.-)
                                                                                                                (9250/3)) 
8803/3 Small cell sarcoma 8870/0 Myelolipoma (D17.-)
8804/3 Epithelioid sarcoma 8880/0 Hibernoma (D17.-)
8881/0 Lipoblastomatosis (D17.-)
889-892 Myomatous neoplasms
881-883 Fibromatous neoplasms 8810/0 Fibroma NOS 8810/3 Fibrosarcoma NOS 8890/0 Leiomyoma NOS
8811/0 Fibromyxoma 8890/1 Leiomyomatosis NOS
8811/3 Fibromyxosarcoma 8890/3 Leiomyosarcoma NOS
8812/0 Periosteal fibroma (D16.-) 8891/0 Epithelioid leiomyoma
8812/3 Periosteal fibrosarcoma (C40.-, C41.-) 8891/3 Epithelioid leiomyosarcoma
8813/0 Fascial fibroma 8892/0 Cellular leiomyoma
8813/3 Fascial fibrosarcoma 8893/0 Bizarre leiomyoma
8814/3 Infantile fibrosarcoma 8894/0 Angiomyoma
8820/0 Elastofibroma 8894/3 Angiomyosarcoma
8821/1 Aggressive fibromatosis 8895/0 Myoma
8822/1 Abdominal fibromatosis 8895/3 Myosarcoma
8823/1 Desmoplastic fibroma 8896/3 Myxoid leiomyosarcoma
8824/1 Myofibromatosis 8897/1 Smooth muscle tumour NOS
8830/0 Fibrous histiocytoma NOS 8900/0 Rhabdomyoma NOS
8830/1 Atypical fibrous histiocytoma 8900/3 Rhabdomyosarcoma NOS
8830/3 Fibrous histiocytoma, malignant 8901/3 Pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcoma
8832/0 Dermatofibroma NOS (D23.-) 8902/3 Mixed type rhabdomyosarcoma
Dermatofibrosarcoma NOS (C44.-) 8903/0 Fetal rhabdomyoma
8904/0 Adult rhabdomyoma
8832/3
1009
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
8910/3 Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma 904 Synovial-like neoplasms
8920/3 Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma 9040/0 Synovioma, benign
893-899 Complex mixed and stromal 9040/3 Synovial sarcoma NOS
        neoplasms 
9041/3 Synovial sarcoma, spindle cell
8930/0 Endometrial stromal nodule (D26.1) 9042/3 Synovial sarcoma, epithelioid cell
8930/3 Endometrial stromal sarcoma (C54.-) 9043/3 Synovial sarcoma, biphasic
8931/1 Endolymphatic stromal myosis (D39.0) 9044/3 8932/0 Adenomyoma Clear cell sarcoma (except of kidney
                                                                    (8964/3))
8933/3 Adenosarcoma 905 Mesothelial neoplasms
8940/0 Pleomorphic adenoma 9050/0 Mesothelioma, benign (D19.-)
8940/3 Mixed tumour, malignant NOS 9050/3 Mesothelioma, malignant (C45.-)
8941/3 Carcinoma in pleomorphic adenoma 9051/0 Fibrous mesothelioma, benign (D19.-)
       (C07, C08.-) 
9051/3 Fibrous mesothelioma, malignant
      (C45.-)
9052/0 Epithelioid mesothelioma, benign
      (D19.-)
9052/3 Epithelioid mesothelioma, malignant
      (C45.-)
8950/3 Müllerian mixed tumour (C54.-) 8951/3 Mesodermal mixed tumour 8960/1 Mesoblastic nephroma 8960/3 Nephroblastoma NOS (C64) 8963/3 Rhabdoid sarcoma 8964/3 Clear cell sarcoma of kidney (C64) 9053/0 Mesothelioma, biphasic, benign (D19.-)
8970/3 Hepatoblastoma (C22.0) 9053/3 8971/3 Mesothelioma, biphasic, malignant
                                           (C45.-)
Pancreatoblastoma (C25.-) 8972/3 9054/0 Adenomatoid tumour NOS (D19.-)
Pulmonary blastoma (C34.-) 8980/3 9055/1 Cystic mesothelioma
Carcinosarcoma NOS 8981/3 Carcinosarcoma, embryonal 906-909 Germ cell neoplasms
8982/0 Myoepithelioma 9060/3 Dysgerminoma
8990/0 Mesenchymoma, benign 9061/3 Seminoma NOS (C62.-)
8990/1 Mesenchymoma NOS 9062/3 Seminoma, anaplastic (C62.-)
8990/3 Mesenchymoma, malignant 9063/3 Spermatocytic seminoma (C62.-)
8991/3 Embryonal sarcoma 9064/3 Germinoma
900-903 Fibroepithelial neoplasms 9070/3 Embryonal carcinoma NOS
9000/0 9071/3 Endodermal sinus tumour
Brenner tumour NOS (D27) 9000/1 9072/3 Polyembryoma
Brenner tumour, borderline 9073/1 Gonadoblastoma
malignancy (D39.1) 
9000/3 Brenner tumour, malignant (C56) 9080/0 Teratoma, benign
9010/0 Fibroadenoma NOS (D24) 9080/1 Teratoma NOS
9011/0 Intracanalicular fibroadenoma (D24) 9080/3 Teratoma, malignant NOS
9012/0 Pericanalicular fibroadenoma (D24) 9081/3 Teratocarcinoma
9013/0 Adenofibroma NOS (D27) 9082/3 Malignant teratoma, undifferentiated
9014/0 Serous adenofibroma (D27) 9083/3 Malignant teratoma, intermediate
9015/0 Mucinous adenofibroma (D27) 9084/0 Dermoid cyst NOS
9016/0 Giant fibroadenoma (D24) 9084/3 9020/0 Teratoma with malignant
                                             transformation
Phyllodes tumour, benign (D24) 9020/1 9085/3 Mixed germ cell tumour
Phyllodes tumour NOS (D48.6) 9020/3 9090/0 Struma ovarii NOS (D27)
Phyllodes tumour, malignant (C50.-) 9030/0 9090/3 Struma ovarii, malignant (C56)
Juvenile fibroadenoma (D24) 9091/1 Strumal carcinoid (D39.1)
1010
MORPHOLOGY OF NEOPLASMS
910 Trophoblastic neoplasms 917 Lymphatic vessel tumours
9100/0 Hydatidiform mole NOS (O01.9) 9170/0 Lymphangioma NOS (D18.1)
9100/1 Invasive hydatidiform mole (D39.2) 9170/3 Lymphangiosarcoma
9100/3 Choriocarcinoma NOS 9171/0 Capillary lymphangioma (D18.1)
9101/3 Choriocarcinoma combined with other 9172/0 Cavernous lymphangioma (D18.1)
       germ cell elements 
9173/0 Cystic lymphangioma (D18.1)
9102/3 Malignant teratoma, trophoblastic 9174/0 Lymphangiomyoma (D18.1)
       (C62.-) 
9103/0 Partial hydatidiform mole (O01.1) 9174/1 Lymphangiomyomatosis
9104/1 Placental site trophoblastic tumour 9175/0 Haemolymphangioma (D18.1)
       (D39.2) 
918-924 Osseous and chondromatous
       neoplasms
9180/0 Osteoma NOS (D16.-)
9180/3 Osteosarcoma NOS (C40.-, C41.-)
9181/3 Chondroblastic osteosarcoma (C40.-,
      C41.-)
9182/3 Fibroblastic osteosarcoma (C40.-,
      C41.-)
9183/3 Telangiectatic osteosarcoma (C40.-,
      C41.-)
9184/3 Osteosarcoma in Paget's disease of
      bone (C40.-, C41.-)
911 Mesonephromas
9110/0 Mesonephroma, benign
9110/1 Mesonephric tumour
9110/3 Mesonephroma, malignant 912-916 Blood vessel tumours 9120/0 Haemangioma NOS (D18.0) 9120/3 Haemangiosarcoma 9121/0 Cavernous haemangioma (D18.0) 9122/0 Venous haemangioma (D18.0) 9123/0 Racemose haemangioma (D18.0) 9185/3 Small cell osteosarcoma (C40.-, C41.-)
9124/3 Kupffer cell sarcoma (C22.3) 9190/3 9125/0 Epithelioid haemangioma (D18.0) Juxtacortical osteosarcoma (C40.-,
                                                                                 C41.-)
9126/0 Histiocytoid haemangioma (D18.0) 9191/0 Osteoid osteoma NOS (D16.-)
9130/0 Haemangioendothelioma, benign 9200/0 Osteoblastoma NOS (D16.-)
       (D18.0) 
9200/1 Aggressive osteoblastoma (D48.0)
Osteochondroma (D16.-)
9130/1 Haemangioendothelioma NOS 9210/0 9130/3 Haemangioendothelioma, malignant 9210/1 Osteochondromatosis NOS (D48.0)
9131/0 Capillary haemangioma (D18.0) 9220/0 Chondroma NOS (D16.-)
9132/0 Intramuscular haemangioma (D18.0) 9220/1 Chondromatosis NOS
9133/1 Epithelioid haemangioendothelioma 9220/3 Chondrosarcoma NOS (C40.-, C41.-)
       NOS 
9221/0 Juxtacortical chondroma (D16.-)
9133/3 Epithelioid haemangioendothelioma, 9221/3 Juxtacortical chondrosarcoma (C40.-,
       malignant C41.-)
9134/1 Intravascular bronchial alveolar 9230/0 Chondroblastoma NOS (D16.-)
       tumour (D38.1) 
9140/3 9230/3 Kaposi's sarcoma (C46.-) Chondroblastoma, malignant (C40.-,
                                      C41.-)
9141/0 Angiokeratoma 9231/3 Myxoid chondrosarcoma
9142/0 Verrucous keratotic haemangioma 9240/3 Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma
       (D18.0) 
9150/0 9241/0 Chondromyxoid fibroma (D16.-)
Haemangiopericytoma, benign 9150/1 Haemangiopericytoma NOS 925 Giant cell tumours
9150/3 Haemangiopericytoma, malignant 9250/1 Giant cell tumour of bone NOS (D48.0)
9160/0 Angiofibroma NOS 9250/3 9161/1 Haemangioblastoma Giant cell tumour of bone, malignant
                                                       (C40.-, C41.-)
9251/1 Giant cell tumour of soft parts NOS
1011
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
9251/3
926
Malignant giant cell tumour of soft 9360/1 Pinealoma (D44.5)
parts 
9361/1 Pineocytoma (D44.5)
Miscellaneous bone tumours 9362/3 Pineoblastoma (C75.3)
9363/0 Melanotic neuroectodermal tumour
9364/3 Peripheral neuroectodermal tumour
9370/3 Chordoma
938-48 Gliomas
9380/3 Glioma, malignant (C71.-)
9381/3 Gliomatosis cerebri (C71.-)
9260/3 Ewing's sarcoma (C40.-, C41.-)
9261/3 Adamantinoma of long bones (C40.-)
9262/0 Ossifying fibroma (D16.-)
927-934 Odontogenic tumours
9270/0 Odontogenic tumour, benign (D16.4,
      D16.5)
9270/1 Odontogenic tumour NOS (D48.0) 9382/3 Mixed glioma (C71.-)
9270/3 Odontogenic tumour, malignant 9383/1 Subependymal glioma (D43.-)
       (C41.0, C41.1) 
9384/1 9271/0 Dentinoma (D16.4, D16.5) Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma
                                      (D43.-)
9272/0 Cementoma NOS (D16.4, D16.5) 9390/0 Choroid plexus papilloma NOS (D33.0)
9273/0 Cementoblastoma, benign (D16.4, 9390/3 Choroid plexus papilloma, malignant
       D16.5) (C71.5)
9274/0 Cementifying fibroma (D16.4, D16.5) 9391/3 Ependymoma NOS (C71.-)
9275/0 Gigantiform cementoma (D16.4, D16.5) 9392/3 Ependymoma, anaplastic (C71.-)
9280/0 Odontoma NOS (D16.4, D16.5) 9393/1 Papillary ependymoma (D43.-)
9281/0 Compound odontoma (D16.4, D16.5) 9394/1 Myxopapillary ependymoma (D43.-)
9282/0 Complex odontoma (D16.4, D16.5) 9400/3 Astrocytoma NOS (C71.-)
9290/0 Ameloblastic fibro-odontoma (D16.4, 9401/3 Astrocytoma, anaplastic (C71.-)
       D16.5) 
9410/3 Protoplasmic astrocytoma (C71.-)
Ameloblastic odontosarcoma (C41.0, 9411/3 Gemistocytic astrocytoma (C71.-)
C41.1) 
Adenomatoid odontogenic tumour 9420/3 Fibrillary astrocytoma (C71.-)
(D16.4, D16.5) 
9421/3 Pilocytic astrocytoma (C71.-)
9422/3 Spongioblastoma NOS (C71.-)
9290/3
9300/0
9301/0 Calcifying odontogenic cyst (D16.4, 9423/3 Spongioblastoma polare (C71.-)
       D16.5) 
9302/0 Odontogenic ghost cell tumour (D16.4, 9424/3 Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (C71.-)
       D16.5) 
9430/3 Astroblastoma (C71.-)
9310/0 Ameloblastoma NOS (D16.4, D16.5) 9440/3 Glioblastoma NOS (C71.-)
9310/3 Ameloblastoma, malignant (C41.0, 9441/3 Giant cell glioblastoma (C71.-)
       C41.1) 
9442/3 Gliosarcoma (C71.-)
9443/3 Primitive polar spongioblastoma (C71.-)
9450/3 Oligodendroglioma NOS (C71.-)
9311/0 Odontoameloblastoma (D16.4, D16.5)
9312/0 Squamous odontogenic tumour (D16.4,
      D16.5)
9320/0 Odontogenic myxoma (D16.4, D16.5) 9451/3 Oligodendroglioma, anaplastic (C71.-)
9321/0 Central odontogenic fibroma (D16.4, 9460/3 Oligodendroblastoma (C71.-)
       D16.5) 
9470/3 Medulloblastoma NOS (C71.6)
9322/0 Peripheral odontogenic fibroma (D16.4, 9471/3 Desmoplastic medulloblastoma (C71.6)
       D16.5) 
9330/0 Ameloblastic fibroma (D16.4, D16.5) 9472/3 Medullomyoblastoma (C71.6)
9330/3 Ameloblastic fibrosarcoma (C41.0, 9473/3 Primitive neuroectodermal tumour
       C41.1) (C71.-)
9340/0 Calcifying epithelial odontogenic 9480/3 Cerebellar sarcoma NOS (C71.6)
       tumour (D16.4, D16.5) 
9481/3 Monstrocellular sarcoma (C71.-)
935-937 Miscellaneous tumours 949-952 Neuroepitheliomatous neoplasms
9350/1 Craniopharyngioma (D44.3, D44.4) 9490/0 Ganglioneuroma
1012
MORPHOLOGY OF NEOPLASMS
9490/3 Ganglioneuroblastoma 9570/0 Neuroma NOS
9491/0 Ganglioneuromatosis 958 9500/3 Neuroblastoma NOS Granular cell tumours and alveolar
                                                       soft part sarcoma
9501/3 Medulloepithelioma NOS 9502/3 9580/0 Granular cell tumour NOS
Teratoid medulloepithelioma 9503/3 9580/3 Granular cell tumour, malignant
Neuroepithelioma NOS 9504/3 9581/3 Alveolar soft part sarcoma
Spongioneuroblastoma 9505/1 Ganglioglioma 959 9506/0 Neurocytoma Malignant lymphomas NOS or
                                                                diffuse
9507/0 Pacinian tumour 9590/3 9510/3 Retinoblastoma NOS (C69.2) Malignant lymphoma NOS (C84.5,
                                                               C85.9)
9511/3 Retinoblastoma, differentiated (C69.2) 9591/3 Malignant lymphoma, non-Hodgkin's
                                                    NOS (C85.9)
9512/3 Retinoblastoma, undifferentiated 9520/3 Olfactory neurogenic tumour 9593/3 Reticulosarcoma NOS (C83.3, C83.9)
       (C69.2) 
9521/3 Esthesioneurocytoma (C30.0) 9594/3 Microglioma (C85.7)
9522/3 Esthesioneuroblastoma (C30.0) 9595/3 9523/3 Esthesioneuroepithelioma (C30.0) Malignant lymphoma, diffuse NOS
                                                                                   (C83.9)
953 Meningiomas 965-966 Hodgkin's disease
9530/0 Meningioma NOS (D32.-) 9650/3 Hodgkin's disease NOS (C81.9)
9530/1 Meningiomatosis NOS (D42.-) 9652/3 9530/3 Meningioma, malignant (C70.-) Hodgkin's disease, mixed cellularity
                                                                              NOS (C81.2)
9531/0 Meningotheliomatous meningioma 9653/3 Hodgkin's disease, lymphocytic
       (D32.-) depletion NOS (C81.3)
9532/0 Fibrous meningioma (D32.-) 9654/3 9533/0 Hodgkin's disease, lymphocytic
                                               depletion, diffuse fibrosis (C81.3)
Psammomatous meningioma (D32.-) 9534/0 9655/3 Angiomatous meningioma (D32.-) Hodgkin's disease, lymphocytic
                                                                            depletion, reticular (C81.3)
9535/0 Haemangioblastic meningioma (D32.-) 9657/3 9536/0 Haemangiopericytic meningioma Hodgkin's disease, lymphocytic
                                                         (D32.-) predominance NOS (C81.0)
9658/3 9537/0 Transitional meningioma (D32.-) Hodgkin's disease, lymphocytic
                                             predominance, diffuse (C81.0)
9538/1 Papillary meningioma (D42.-) 9659/3 9539/3 Meningeal sarcomatosis (C70.-) Hodgkin's disease, lymphocytic
                                                                                predominance, nodular (C81.0)
9660/3 Hodgkin's paragranuloma NOS (C81.7)
954-957 Nerve sheath tumours 9661/3 Hodgkin's granuloma (C81.7)
9540/0 Neurofibroma NOS 9662/3 Hodgkin's sarcoma (C81.7)
9540/1 Neurofibromatosis NOS (Q85.0) 9663/3 9540/3 Neurofibrosarcoma Hodgkin's disease, nodular sclerosis
                                                                    NOS (C81.1)
9541/0 Melanotic neurofibroma 9664/3 Hodgkin's disease, nodular sclerosis,
                                    cellular phase (C81.1)
9550/0 Plexiform neurofibroma 9665/3 9560/0 Neurilemmoma NOS Hodgkin's disease, nodular sclerosis,
                                                            lymphocytic predominance (C81.1)
9560/1 Neurinomatosis 9666/3 9560/3 Neurilemmoma, malignant Hodgkin's disease, nodular sclerosis,
                                                           mixed cellularity (C81.1)
9561/3 Triton tumour, malignant 9667/3 9562/0 Neurothekeoma Hodgkin's disease, nodular sclerosis,
                                                           lymphocytic depletion (C81.1)
Includes:
Lymphosarcoma NOS
(C85.9)
1013
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
9697/3 Malignant lymphoma, centroblastic,
      follicular (C82.7)
9698/3 Malignant lymphoma, large cell,
      follicular NOS (C82.2)
Malignant lymphoma, 970 Specified cutaneous and
lymphoplasmacytic (C88.08) peripheral T-cell lymphomas
9672/3 Malignant lymphoma, small cleaved 9700/3 Mycosis fungoides (C84.0)
       cell, diffuse (C83.1) 
9673/3 Malignant lymphoma, lymphocytic, 9701/3 Sézary's disease (C84.1)
       intermediate differentiation, diffuse 
       (C83.8) 
9702/3 Peripheral T-cell lymphoma NOS
      (C84.4)
967-968 Malignant lymphoma, diffuse or
       NOS, specified type
9670/3 Malignant lymphoma, small
      lymphocytic NOS (C83.0)
9671/3 9674/3 9675/3 Malignant lymphoma, mixed small and
                    large cell, diffuse (C83.2)
9676/3 Malignant lymphoma, centroblastic-
      centrocytic, diffuse (C83.8)
9677/3 Malignant lymphomatous polyposis
      (C83.8)
9680/3 Malignant lymphoma, large cell, diffuse
      NOS (C83.3)
9681/3 Malignant lymphoma, large cell,
      cleaved, diffuse (C83.3)
9682/3 Malignant lymphoma, large cell,
      noncleaved, diffuse (C83.3)
9683/3 Malignant lymphoma, centroblastic,
      diffuse (C83.8)
9684/3 
Includes:
Malignant lymphoma, centrocytic
(C83.8)
Lymphoepithelioid
lymphoma (C84.4)
T-zone lymphoma
(C84.4)
9705/3 Peripheral T-cell lymphoma, AILD
      (angioimmunoblastic
     lymphadenopathy with
    dysproteinaemia) (C84.4)
9706/3 Peripheral T-cell lymphoma,
      pleomorphic small cell (C84.4)
9707/3 Peripheral T-cell lymphoma,
      pleomorphic medium and large cell
     (C84.4)
9709/3 Cutaneous lymphoma (C84.5)
971 Other specified non-Hodgkin's
   lymphomas
Malignant lymphoma, immunoblastic 9711/3 Monocytoid B-cell lymphoma (C85.7)
NOS (C83.4) 
9685/3 9712/3 Angioendotheliomatosis (C85.7)
Malignant lymphoma, lymphoblastic 9713/3 Angiocentric T-cell lymphoma (C85.7)
(C83.5) 
9686/3 Malignant lymphoma, small cell, 9714/3 Large cell (Ki-1†) lymphoma (C85.7)
       noncleaved, diffuse (C83.0, C83.6) 
972 Other lymphoreticular neoplasms
9687/3 Burkitt's lymphoma NOS (C83.7) 9720/3 Malignant histiocytosis (C96.1)
969 Malignant lymphoma, follicular or 9722/3 Letterer-Siwe disease (C96.0)
    nodular, with or without diffuse 
    areas 
9723/3 True histiocytic lymphoma (C96.3)
973 Plasma cell tumours
9690/3 Malignant lymphoma, follicular NOS 9731/3 Plasmacytoma NOS (C90.2)
       (C82.9) 
9691/3 Malignant lymphoma, mixed small 9732/3 Multiple myeloma (C90.0)
       cleaved and large cell, follicular (C82.1) 
9692/3 Malignant lymphoma, centroblastic- 974 Mast cell tumours
       centrocytic, follicular (C82.7) 
9693/3 Malignant lymphoma, lymphocytic, 9740/1 Mastocytoma NOS (D47.0)
       well differentiated, nodular (C82.7) 
9740/3 Mast cell sarcoma (C96.2)
Malignant lymphoma, lymphocytic, 9741/3 Malignant mastocytosis (C96.2)
intermediate differentiation, nodular 
(C82.7) 
976 Immunoproliferative diseases
9695/3 Malignant lymphoma, small cleaved 9760/3 Immunoproliferative disease NOS
       cell, follicular (C82.0) (C88.9)
9696/3 Malignant lymphoma, lymphocytic, 9761/3 Waldenström's macroglobulinaemia
       poorly differentiated, nodular (C82.7) (C88.0)
9762/3 Alpha heavy chain disease (C88.1)
9694/3
1014
MORPHOLOGY OF NEOPLASMS
9763/3 Gamma heavy chain disease (C88.2)
9764/3 Immunoproliferative small intestinal
      disease (C88.3)
9868/3 Chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia
      (C92.7)
9765/1 Monoclonal gammopathy (D47.2)
987 Basophilic leukaemia
9766/1 Angiocentric immunoproliferative
      lesion (D47.7)
9870/3 Basophilic leukaemia (C92.-)
9767/1 Angioimmunoblastic
      lymphadenopathy (D47.7)
988 Eosinophilic leukaemia
9880/3 Eosinophilic leukaemia (C92.-)
9768/1 T-gamma lymphoproliferative disease
      (D47.7)
989 Monocytic leukaemias
980 Leukaemias NOS
9890/3 Monocytic leukaemia NOS (C93.9)
9800/3 Leukaemia NOS (C95.9)
9891/3 Acute monocytic leukaemia (C93.0)
9892/3 9801/3 Subacute monocytic leukaemia (C93.2)
Acute leukaemia NOS (C95.0) 9893/3 Chronic monocytic leukaemia (C93.1)
9802/3 Subacute leukaemia NOS (C95.2) 9894/3 9803/3 Chronic leukaemia NOS (C95.1) Aleukaemic monocytic leukaemia
                                                                                 (C93.7)
9804/3 Aleukaemic leukaemia NOS (C95.7) 990-994 Other leukaemias
982 Lymphoid leukaemias 9900/3 Mast cell leukaemia (C94.3)
9820/3 Lymphoid leukaemia NOS (C91.9) 9910/3 9821/3 Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia NOS Acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia
                                                    (C91.0) (C94.2)
9930/3 Myeloid sarcoma (C92.3)
Subacute lymphoid leukaemia (C91.2) 9931/3 Acute panmyelosis (C94.7)
9823/3 Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (C91.1) 9932/3 Acute myelofibrosis (C94.5)
9824/3 Aleukaemic lymphoid leukaemia 9940/3 Hairy cell leukaemia (C91.4)
       (C91.7) 
9941/3 Leukaemic reticuloendotheliosis
      (C91.4)
995-997 Miscellaneous myeloproliferative
       and lymphoproliferative disorders
9950/1 Polycythaemia vera (D45)
9960/1 Chronic myeloproliferative disease
      (D47.1)
9961/1 Myelosclerosis with myeloid
      metaplasia (D47.1)
9822/3
9825/3 Prolymphocytic leukaemia (C91.3) 9826/3 Burkitt's cell leukaemia (C91.7) 9827/3 Adult T-cell leukaemia/lymphoma 983 Plasma cell leukaemia 9830/3 Plasma cell leukaemia (C90.1) 984 Erythroleukaemias 9840/3 Erythroleukaemia (C94.0) 9962/1 Idiopathic thrombocythaemia (D47.3)
                                                                                       (C91.5) 
9841/3 Acute erythraemia (C94.0) 9970/1 9842/3 Lymphoproliferative disease NOS
                                              (D47.9)
Chronic erythraemia (C94.1) 985 Lymphosarcoma cell leukaemia 998 Myelodysplastic syndrome
9850/3 9980/1 Refractory anaemia NOS (D46.4)
Lymphosarcoma cell leukaemia (C94.7) 9981/1 986 Myeloid (granulocytic) leukaemias Refractory anaemia without
                                                                                 sideroblasts (D46.0)
9860/3 Myeloid leukaemia NOS (C92.9) 9982/1 Refractory anaemia with sideroblasts
                                           (D46.1)
9861/3 Acute myeloid leukaemia (C92.0) 9983/1 9862/3 Subacute myeloid leukaemia (C92.2) Refractory anaemia with excess of
                                                                                       blasts (D46.2)
9863/3 Chronic myeloid leukaemia (C92.1) 9984/1 9864/3 Aleukaemic myeloid leukaemia (C92.7) Refractory anaemia with excess of
                                                                                           blasts with transformation (D46.3)
9866/3 Acute promyelocytic leukaemia (C92.4) 9989/1 Myelodysplastic syndrome NOS
                                                   (D46.9)
9867/3 Acute myelomonocytic leukaemia 
       (C92.5) 
1015
I
CHAPTER XXIII
Provisional Codes for Research and Temporary
Assignment
This chapter contains the following blocks:
U00-U49
U50-U99
Provisional codes for temporary assignment by World Health Organization of new diseases of
uncertain etiology
Provisional codes for research and temporary assignment in Canada
Provisional codes for temporary assignment by World Health
Organization of new diseases of uncertain etiology
(U00-U49)
U04
Severe acute respiratory syndrome [SARS]
U04.90o Suspected severe acute respiratory syndrome [SARS]
U04.91o Probable severe acute respiratory syndrome [SARS]
Provisional codes for research and temporary assignment in
Canada
(U50-U99)
Note:
This category should never be used in primary coding. These codes are provided for use as supplementary or
additional codes when it is desired to identify the resistant properties of infectious agent(s), which are
themselves classified elsewhere.
Use additional code (B95- B97) to identify bacterial, viral and other infectious agents resistant to antimicrobial drugs.
U82
Resistance to betalactam antibiotics
Note:
This category should never be used in primary coding. These codes are provided for use as
supplementary or additional codes when it is desired to identify the resistant properties of
infectious agent(s), which are themselves classified elsewhere.
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify bacterial, viral and other infectious agents resistant to bectalactam
antibiotic treatment.
U82.0
Resistance to penicillin
Includes:
Resistance to:
•
Amoxicillin
•
Ampicillin
1017
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
U82.1 Resistance to methicillin
     Includes:
    Resistance to:
   •
    cloxacillin
   •
    flucloxacillin
   •
    oxacillin
   Use additional code (B95.6) Staphylococcus aureus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters, to
  identify any methicillin resistant staphlococcus aureus [MRSA]
U82.2 Resistance to other betalactam antibiotics
U82.3 Extended spectrum betalactamase (ESBL) resistance
U82.9 Resistance to betalactam antibiotics, unspecified
U82.1
U83
Resistance to other antibiotics
Note:
This category should never be used in primary coding. These codes are provided for use as
supplementary or additional codes when it is desired to identify the resistant properties of
infectious agent(s), which are themselves classified elsewhere.
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify bacterial, viral and other infectious agents resistant to other
antibiotic treatment.
U83.0 Resistance to vancomycin
     Use additional code (B96.81) Enterococcus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters, to identify any
    vancomycin resistant enterococcus [VRE]
U83.1 Resistance to other vancomycin related antibiotics
U83.2 Resistance to quinolones
U83.7 Resistance to multiple antibiotics only
U83.8 Resistance to other single specified antibiotic
U83.9 Resistance to unspecified antibiotic
     Includes:
    Resistance to antibiotics NOS
U84
Resistance to other antimicrobial drugs
Note:
This category should never be used in primary coding. These codes are provided for use as
supplementary or additional codes when it is desired to identify the resistant properties of
infectious agent(s), which are themselves classified elsewhere.
Use additional code (B95-B97) to identify bacterial, viral and other infectious agents resistant to antimicrobial
drugs.
Excludes:
Resistance to antibiotics (U82 - U83)
U84.0
1018
Resistance to antiparasitic drug(s)
Includes:
Resistance to quinine and related compounds
PROVISIONAL CODES FOR RESEARCH AND TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT
U84.1 Resistance to antifungal drug(s)
U84.2 Resistance to antiviral drug(s)
U84.3 Resistance to tuberculostatic drug(s)
U84.7 Resistance to multiple antimicrobial drugs
     Excludes:
    Resistance to multiple antibiotics only (U83.7)
U84.8 Resistance to other specified antimicrobial drug
U84.9 Resistance to unspecified antimicrobial drugs
     Includes:
    Drug resistance NOS
   Resistance to antimicrobial drugs NOS
U85
U98.1o
Resistance to antineoplastic drugs
Note:
This category should never be used in primary coding. It provided for use as supplementary or
additional code when it is desired to identify the resistant properties of infectious agent(s), which
are themselves classified elsewhere.
Use additional code (B95 - B97) to identify bacterial, viral and other infectious agents resistant to antineoplastic
drugs.
U98
Place of occurrence
Note:
The following category is for use with categories ( W00-Y34 ) except (Y06.-) and (Y07.-) to
identify the place of occurrence of the external cause
U98.0o Place of occurrence, home
      Includes:
     Apartment
    Boarding-house
   Caravan [trailer] park, residential
  Farmhouse
 Home premises
House (residential)
Noninstitutional place of residence
Private:
•
 driveway to home
•
 garage
•
 garden to home
•
 yard to home
Swimming-pool in private house or garden
Excludes:
abandoned or derelict house (U98.8)
home under construction but not yet occupied (U98.6)
institutional place of residence (U98.1)
U98.1o Place of occurrence, residential institution
      Includes:
     Children's home
    Dormitory
   Home for the sick
  Hospice
 Military camp
Nursing home
Old people's home
Orphanage
Pensioner's home
Prison
Reform school
1019
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
U98.2o Place of occurrence, school other institution and public area
      Includes:
     Building (including adjacent grounds) used by the general public or by a particular group of the
    public such as:
   •
    assembly hall
   •
    campus
   •
    church
   •
    cinema
   •
    clubhouse
   •
    college
   •
    court-house
   •
    dancehall
   •
    day nursery
   •
    gallery
   •
    hospital
   •
    institute for higher education
   •
    kindergarten
   •
    library
   •
    movie-house
   •
    museum
   •
    music-hall
   •
    opera-house
   •
    post office
   •
    public hall
   •
    school (private)(public)(state)
   •
    theatre
   •
    university
   •
    youth centre
   Excludes:
  building under construction (U98.6)
 residential institution (U98.1)
sports and athletics area (U98.3)
U98.3o Place of occurrence, sports and athletics area
      Includes:
     Baseball/football field
    Basketball-court
   Cricket ground
  Football field
 Golf-course
Gymnasium
Hockey (field)(arena)
Riding-school
Skating-rink
Squash-court
Stadium
Swimming-pool, public
Tennis-court
Excludes:
sports and athletics area within a school or other institution (U98.2)
swimming-pool or tennis-court in private home or garden (U98.0)
U98.4o Place of occurrence, street and highway
      Includes:
     Curb
    Freeway
   Motorway
  Pavement
 Road
Sidewalk
U98.2o
1020
PROVISIONAL CODES FOR RESEARCH AND TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT
U98.5o
Place of occurrence, trade and service area
Includes:
Airport
Bank
Café
Casino
Garage (commercial)
Gas station
Grocery store
Hotel
Market
Office building
Petrol station
Radio or television station
Restaurant
Service station
Shop (commercial)
Shopping mall
Station (bus)(railway)(subway)
Store
Supermarket
Warehouse
Excludes:
garage in private home (U98.0)
U98.6o Place of occurrence, industrial and construction area
      Includes:
     Building [any] under construction
    Dockyard
   Dry dock
  Factory:
 •
  building
 •
  premises
 Gasworks
Industrial yard
Mine
Oil rig and other offshore installations
Pit (coal) (gravel) (sand)
Power-station (coal) (nuclear) (oil)
Shipyard
Tunnel under construction
Workshop
U98.7o 
U98.7o
Place of occurrence, farm
Includes:
Farm:
•
 buildings
•
 land under cultivation
Ranch
Excludes:
farmhouse and home premises of farm (U98.0)
1021
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
U98.8o Other specified place of occurrence
      Includes:
     Beach
    Campsite
   Canal
  Caravan site NOS
 Derelict house
Desert
Dock NOS
Forest
Harbour
Hill
Lake
Marsh
Military training ground
Mountain
Park (amusement) (public)
Parking-lot and parking-place
Pond or pool
Prairie
Public place NOS
Railway line
River
Sea
Seashore
Stream
Swamp
Water reservoir
Zoo
U98.9o Unspecified place of occurrence
U99o Activity
U99.0o While engaged in sports and recreational activity
U99.00o Ball sports and recreational activity
U99.000o Basketball
U99.001o Volleyball
        Includes:
U98.8o
U99.002o Soccer
U99.003o Football
        Includes:
beach
indoor
outdoor
flag
tackle
touch
U99.004o Rugby
U99.005o Handball
U99.008o Other specified ball sports and recreational activity
        Includes:
       korfball
      netball
U99.009o Unspecified ball sports and recreational activity
1022
PROVISIONAL CODES FOR RESEARCH AND TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT
U99.01o Bat or stick sports and recreational activity
U99.010o Baseball
        Includes:
U99.030o
fastball
slow-pitch
softball
T-ball
U99.011o Ice hockey
        Includes:
       indoor
      outdoor
U99.012o Street hockey
U99.013o Field hockey
U99.014o Floor hockey
U99.015o Lacrosse
U99.016o Ringette
U99.018o Other specified bat/stick sports and recreational activity
U99.019o Unspecified bat/stick sports and recreational activity
U99.02o Water sports and recreational activity
U99.020o Swimming
        Excludes:
diving (U99.024)
synchronized swimming (U99.021)
U99.021o Team water sports
        Includes:
       synchronized swimming
      water polo
U99.022o Water skiing
        Includes:
       wake boarding
      water ski jumping
     water sliding
    water tubing
U99.023o Fishing
        Includes:
U99.024o
Diving
Includes:
Excludes:
ice fishing
rock fishing
spear fishing
cliff diving
platform diving
springboard diving
scuba diving (U99.025)
U99.025o Scuba diving and snorkeling
U99.028o Other specified water sports and recreational activity
U99.029o Unspecified water sports and recreational activity
U99.03o Motor and non-motored transport sports and recreational activity
U99.030o Motor boat sports
        Includes:
       jet boating
      jet skiing
     power boating
1023
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
U99.031o Non-motored boat sports
        Includes:
       canoeing
      kayaking
     rowing and sculling
    sailing
   surfing
  windsurfing
 yachting
U99.032o All-terrain vehicle (ATV) sports
U99.033o Motorized vehicle sports
        Includes:
       dirt biking
      go carting
     motor car racing
    motorcycling
   Excludes:
  all-terrain vehicle (ATV) (U99.032)
 snowmobiling (U99.045)
U99.034o Off road cycling sports
        Includes:
       BMX jumping
      mountain biking
U99.035o On road cycling sports
        Includes:
       road and track cycling
U99.036o Skating wheel sports
        Includes:
       in-line skating
      roller skating
     skate boarding
U99.037o Horse riding sports
        Includes:
       cross country riding
      dressage
     equestrian
    general horseback riding
   harness
  horse racing
 polo
rodeo
showjumping
steeplechase
trotting
U99.038o Other specified motor and non-motored transport sports and recreational activity
U99.039o Unspecified motor and non-motored transport sports and recreational activity
U99.04o Snow and ice sports and recreational activity
U99.040o Skiing
        Includes:
U99.031
Alpine and downhill skiing
cross country and Nordic skiing
snow ski jumping
U99.041o Ice skating
        Includes:
       figure skating
      speed skating
     Excludes:
    hockey (U99.01-)
U99.042o Curling
1024
PROVISIONAL CODES FOR RESEARCH AND TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT
U99.043o
Tobogganing/sledding
Includes:
carpets
dog sledding
saucers
U99.044o Snowboarding
U99.045o Snowmobiling
U99.046o Luge, skeleton and bobsledding
U99.048o Other specified snow and ice sports and recreational activity
U99.049o Unspecified snow and ice sports and recreational activity
U99.05o Track and field and aerobic sports and recreational activity
U99.050o Running
        Includes:
U99.063o
U99.051o
U99.052o
U99.053o
Walking
Includes:
Jumping
Includes:
Throwing
Includes:
hurdles
jogging
marathon running
sprinting
hiking
power walking
trekking
high jump
long jump
pole vaulting
triple jump
discus
hammer
javelin
shot put
U99.054o Other aerobics
        Includes:
       aquaerobics
      boxercise
     calisthenics
    endurance skipping
   high and low impact
  pump
 sculpture
step
taibo
U99.055o Yoga and Tai Chi
U99.058o Other specified track and field and aerobic sports and recreational activity
U99.059o Unspecified track and field and aerobic sports and recreational activity
U99.06o Gymnastics and aesthetic sports and recreational activity
U99.060o Balance beam, side horse and pommel horse
U99.061o Rings, parallel bars and high bar
U99.062o Trampoline
U99.063o Floor and vault
        Includes:
       floor exercise
      rhythmic gymnastics
     tumbling
1025
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
U99.064o Aesthetic sports
        Includes:
       dancing
      marching
U99.068o Other specified gymnastic and aesthetic sports and recreational activity
U99.069o Unspecified gymnastic and aesthetic sports and recreational activity
U99.07o Racquet sports and recreational activity
U99.070o Badminton
U99.071o Racquetball
U99.072o Squash
U99.073o Table tennis and ping-pong
U99.074o Tennis
        Includes:
U99.078o Other specified racquet sports and recreational activity
U99.079o Unspecified racquet sports and recreational activity
U99.08o Other specified sports and recreational activity
U99.080o Target and precision sports
        Includes:
       archery
      billiards
     bowling
    croquet
   darts
  golf
 shuffleboard
U99.081o Firearm shooting
U99.082o Hunting sports
U99.083o Combative sports
        Includes:
       boxing
      fencing
     martial arts
    self defence training
   wrestling
U99.084o Power sports
        Includes:
       bench press
      body building
     strength training
    weight lifting
   wood chopping and sawing
U99.085o Water adventure sports
        Includes:
       river and white-water rafting
U99.086o Aero sports
        Includes:
       aerobatics
      gliding
     hot air ballooning
    parachuting
U99.064
1026
clay, grass and hard court tennis
PROVISIONAL CODES FOR RESEARCH AND TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT
U99.087o
Other adventure sports
Includes:
abseiling
bungy jumping
mountaineering
orienteering
rappelling
rock climbing
rogaining
wall climbing
U99.9o
U99.088o Other specified sports and recreational activity
        Includes:
       exercise NEC
      fitness equipment
U99.09o Unspecified sports and recreational activity
       Includes:
      exercise NOS
U99.1o While engaged in leisure activity
      Includes:
     Hobby activities
    Leisure-time activities with an entertainment element such as going to the cinema, to a dance or
   to a party
  Participation in sessions and activities of voluntary organizations
 Excludes:
sports activities (U99.0)
U99.2o While working for an income
      Includes:
     Paid work (manual)(professional)
    Transportation (time) to and from such activities
   Work for salary, bonus and other types of income
U99.3o While engaged in other types of work
      Includes:
     Domestic duties such as:
    •
     caring for children and relatives
    •
     cleaning
    •
     cooking
    •
     gardening
    •
     household maintenance
    Duties for which one would not normally gain an income
   Learning activities, e.g. attending school session or lesson
  Undergoing education
U99.4o While resting, sleeping, eating or engaging in other vital activities
      Includes:
     Personal hygiene
U99.8o While engaged in other specified activities
U99.9o During unspecified activity
1027
Special tabulation lists
for mortality
and morbidity
Mortality tabulation lists
List 1 - General mortality - condensed list (103 causes)
List 2 - General mortality - selected list (80 causes)
List 3 - Infant and child mortality - condensed list (67 causes)
List 4 - Infant and child mortality - selected list (51 causes)
Tabulation list for morbidity (298 causes)
Special tabulation lists for mortality and morbidity
Note:
These lists were adopted by the World Health Assembly in 1990 for the tabulation of data.
Mortality tabulation list 1
General mortality
Condensed list
1-001 Certain infectious and parasitic diseases A00-B99
1-002 Cholera A00
1-003 Diarrhoea and gastroenteritis of presumed infectious origin A09
1-004 Other intestinal infectious diseases A01-A08
1-005 Respiratory tuberculosis A15-A16
1-006 Other tuberculosis A17-A19
1-007 Plague A20
1-008 Tetanus A33-A35
1-009 Diphtheria A36
1-010 Whooping cough A37
1-011 Meningococcal infection A39
1-012 Septicaemia A40-A41
1-013 Infections with a predominantly sexual mode of transmission A50-A64
1-014 Acute poliomyelitis A80
1-015 Rabies A82
1-016 Yellow fever A95
1-017 Other arthropod-borne viral fevers and viral haemorrhagic fevers A90-A94, A96-A99
1-018 Measles B05
1-019 Viral hepatitis B15-B19
1-020 Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease B20-B24
1-021 Malaria B50-B54
1-022 Leishmaniasis B55
1-023 Trypanosomiasis B56-B57
1-024 Schistosomiasis B65
1-025 Remainder of certain infectious and parasitic diseases A21-A32, A38, A42-A49, A65-A79, A81,
                                                            A83-A89, B00-B04, B06-B09, B25-B49,
                                                           B58-B64, B66-B94, B99
1-026 Neoplasms C00-D48
1-027 Malignant neoplasm of lip, oral cavity and pharynx C00-C14
1-028 Malignant neoplasm of oesophagus C15
1-029 Malignant neoplasm of stomach C16
1-030 Malignant neoplasm of colon, rectum and anus C18-C21
1-031 Malignant neoplasm of liver and intrahepatic bile ducts C22
1-032 Malignant neoplasm of pancreas C25
1-033 Malignant neoplasm of larynx C32
1-034 Malignant neoplasm of trachea, bronchus and lung C33-C34
1031
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
1-035
Malignant melanoma of skin
C43
1-036 Malignant neoplasm of breast C50
1-037 Malignant neoplasm of cervix uteri C53
1-038 Malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified parts of uterus C54-C55
1-039 Malignant neoplasm of ovary C56
1-040 Malignant neoplasm of prostate C61
1-041 Malignant neoplasm of bladder C67
1-042 Malignant neoplasm of meninges, brain and other parts of central C70-C72
      nervous system 
1-043 Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma C82-C85
1-044 Multiple myeloma and malignant plasma cell neoplasms C90
1-045 Leukaemias C91-C95
1-046 Remainder of malignant neoplasms C17, C23-C24, C26-C31, C37-C41, C44-
                                      C49, C51-C52, C57-C60, C62-C66, C68-
                                     C69, C73-C81, C88, C96-C97
1-047 Remainder of neoplasms D00-D48
1-048 Diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and certain D50-D89
      disorders involving the immune mechanism 
1-049 Anaemias D50-D64
1-050 Remainder of diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and D65-D89
      certain disorders involving the immune mechanism 
1-051 Endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases E00-E88
1-052 Diabetes mellitus E10-E14
1-053 Malnutrition E40-E46
1-054 Remainder of endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases E00-E07, E15-E34, E50-E88
1-055 Mental and behavioural disorders F01-F99
1-056 Mental and behavioural disorders due to psychoactive substance use F10-F19
1-057 Remainder of mental and behavioural disorders F01-F09, F20-F99
1-058 Diseases of the nervous sytem G00-G98
1-059 Meningitis G00, G03
1-060 Alzheimer's disease G30
1-061 Remainder of diseases of the nervous system G04-G25, G31-G98
1-062 Diseases of the eye and adnexa H00-H59
1-063 Diseases of the ear and mastoid process H60-H93
1-064 Diseases of the circulatory system I00-I99
1-065 Acute rheumatic fever and chronic rheumatic heart diseases I00-I09
1-066 Hypertensive diseases I10-I13
1-067 Ischaemic heart diseases I20-I25
1-068 Other heart diseases I26-I51
1-069 Cerebrovascular diseases I60-I69
1-070 Atherosclerosis I70
1-071 Remainder of diseases of the circulatory system I71-I99
1-072 Diseases of the respiratory system J00-J98
1-073 Influenza J10-J11
1032
SPECIAL TABULATION LISTS FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY
1-074 Pneumonia J12-J18
1-075 Other acute lower respiratory infections J20-J22
1-076 Chronic lower respiratory diseases J40-J47
1-077 Remainder of diseases of the respiratory system J00-J06, J30-J39, J60-J98
1-078 Diseases of the digestive system K00-K92
1-079 Gastric and duodenal ulcer K25-K27
1-080 Diseases of the liver K70-K76
1-081 Remainder of diseases of the digestive system K00-K22, K28-K66, K80-K92
1-082 Diseases of the skin and subcutaneous tissue L00-L98
1-083 Diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective tissue M00-M99
1-084 Diseases of the genitourinary system N00-N99
1-085 Glomerular and renal tubulointerstitial diseases N00-N15
1-086 Remainder of diseases of the genitourinary< system N17-N98
1-087 Pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium O00-O99
1-088 Pregnancy with abortive outcome O00-O07
1-089 Other direct obstetric deaths O10-O92
1-090 Indirect obstetric deaths O98-O99
1-091 Remainder of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium O95-O97
1-092 Certain conditions originating in the perinatal period P00-P96
1-093 Congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal Q00-Q99
      abnormalities 
1-094 Symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, R00-R99
     not elsewhere classified
1-095 External causes of morbidity and mortality V01-Y89
1-096 Transport accidents V01-V99
1-097 Falls W00-W19
1-098 Accidental drowning and submersion W65-W74
1-099 Exposure to smoke, fire and flames X00-X09
1-100 Accidental poisoning by and exposure to noxious substances X40-X49
1-101 Intentional self-harm X60-X84
1-102 Assault X85-Y09
1-103 All other external causes W20-W64, W75-W99, X10-X39, X50-X59,
                               Y10-Y89
1-901 SARS U04
1033
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Mortality tabulation list 2
General mortality
Selected list
2-001 Cholera A00
2-002 Diarrhoea and gastroenteritis of presumed infectious origin A09
2-003 Other intestinal infectious diseases A01-A08
2-004 Respiratory tuberculosis A15-A16
2-005 Other tuberculosis A17-A19
2-006 Plague A20
2-007 Tetanus A33-A35
2-008 Diphtheria A36
2-009 Whooping cough A37
2-010 Meningococcal infection A39
2-011 Septicaemia A40-A41
2-012 Infections with a predominantly sexual mode of transmission A50-A64
2-013 Acute poliomyelitis A80
2-014 Rabies A82
2-015 Yellow fever A95
2-016 Other arthropod-borne viral fevers and viral haemorrhagic fevers A90-A94, A96-A99
2-017 Measles B05
2-018 Viral hepatitis B15-B19
2-019 Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease B20-B24
2-020 Malaria B50-B54
2-021 Leishmaniasis B55
2-022 Trypanosomiasis B56-B57
2-023 Schistosomiasis B65
2-024 Remainder of certain infectious and parasitic diseases A21-A32, A38, A42-A49, A65-A79, A81,
                                                            A83-A89, B00-B04, B06-B09, B25-B49,
                                                           B58-B64, B66-B94, B99
2-025 Malignant neoplasm of lip, oral cavity and pharynx C00-C14
2-026 Malignant neoplasm of oesophagus C15
2-027 Malignant neoplasm of stomach C16
2-028 Malignant neoplasm of colon, rectum and anus C18-C21
2-029 Malignant neoplasm of liver and intrahepatic bile ducts C22
2-030 Malignant neoplasm of pancreas C25
2-031 Malignant neoplasm of larynx C32
2-032 Malignant neoplasm of trachea, bronchus and lung C33-C34
2-033 Malignant melanoma of skin C43
2-034 Malignant neoplasm of breast C50
2-035 Malignant neoplasm of cervix uteri C53
2-036 Malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified parts of uterus C54-C55
2-037 Malignant neoplasm of ovary C56
2-038 Malignant neoplasm of prostate C61
1034
SPECIAL TABULATION LISTS FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY
2-039 Malignant neoplasm of bladder C67
2-040 Malignant neoplasm of meninges, brain and other parts of central C70-C72
      nervous system 
2-041 Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma C82-C85
2-042 Multiple myeloma and malignant plasma cell neoplasms C90
2-043 Leukaemias C91-C95
2-044 Remainder of malignant neoplasms C17, C23-C24, C26-C31, C37-C41, C44-
                                      C49, C51-C52, C57-C60, C62-C66, C68-
                                     C69, C73-C81, C88, C96-C97
2-045 Anaemias D50-D64
2-046 Diabetes mellitus E10-E14
2-047 Malnutrition E40-E46
2-048 Mental and behavioural disorders due to pyschoactive substance use F10-F19
2-049 Meningitis G00, G03
2-050 Alzheimer's disease G30
2-051 Acute rheumatic fever and chronic rheumatic heart diseases I00-I09
2-052 Hypertensive diseases I10-I13
2-053 Ischaemic heart diseases I20-I25
2-054 Other heart diseases I26-I51
2-055 Cerebrovascular diseases I60-I69
2-056 Atherosclerosis I70
2-057 Remainder of diseases of the circulatory system I71-I99
2-058 Influenza J10-J11
2-059 Pneumonia J12-J18
2-060 Other acute lower respiratory infections J20-J22
2-061 Chronic lower respiratory diseases J40-J47
2-062 Remainder of diseases of the respiratory system J00-J06, J30-J39, J60-J98
2-063 Gastric and duodenal ulcer K25-K27
2-064 Diseases of the liver K70-K76
2-065 Glomerular and renal tubulo-interstitial diseases N00-N15
2-066 Pregnancy with abortive outcome O00-O07
2-067 Other direct obstetric deaths O10-O92
2-068 Indirect obstetric deaths O98-O99
2-069 Certain conditions originating in the perinatal period P00-P96
2-070 Congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal Q00-Q99
      abnormalities 
2-071 Symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, not R00-R99
     elsewhere classified
2-072 All other diseases D00-D48, D65-D89, E00-E07, E15-E34,
                        E50-E88, F01-F09, F20-F99, G04-G25,
                       G31-G98, H00-H95, K00-K22, K28-K66,
                      K80-K92, L00-L98, M00-M99, N17-N98,
                     O95-O97
2-073 Transport accidents V01-V99
2-074 Falls W00-W19
1035
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
2-075 Accidental drowning and submersion 2-076 Exposure to smoke, fire and flames X00-X09
2-077 Accidental poisoning by and exposure to noxious substances X40-X49
2-078 Intentional self-harm X60-X84
2-079 Assault X85-Y09
2-080 All other external causes W20-W64, W75-W99, X10-X39, X50-X59,
                               Y10-Y89
2-901 SARS U04
1036
W65-W74
SPECIAL TABULATION LISTS FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY
Mortality tabulation list 3
Infant and child mortality
Condensed list
3-001 Certain infectious and parasitic diseases A00-B99
3-002 Diarrhoea and gastroenteritis of presumed infectious origin A09
3-003 Other intestinal infectious diseases A00-A08
3-004 Tuberculosis A15-A19
3-005 Tetanus A33, A35
3-006 Diphtheria A36
3-007 Whooping cough A37
3-008 Meningococcal infection A39
3-009 Septicaemia A40-A41
3-010 Acute poliomyelitis A80
3-011 Measles B05
3-012 Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease B20-B24
3-013 Other viral diseases A81-B04, B06-B19, B25-B34
3-014 Malaria B50-B54
3-015 Remainder of certain infectious and parasitic diseases A20-A32, A38, A42-A79, B35-B49, B55-
                                                            B94, B99
3-016 Neoplasms C00-D48
3-017 Leukaemia C91-C95
3-018 Remainder of malignant neoplasms C00-C90, C96-C97
3-019 Remainder of neoplasms D00-D48
3-020 Diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and certain D50-D89
      disorders involving the immune mechanism 
3-021 Anaemias D50-D64
3-022 Remainder of diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and D65-D89
      certain disorders involving the immune mechanism 
3-023 Endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases E00-E88
3-024 Malnutrition and other nutritional deficiencies E40-E64
3-025 Remainder of endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases E00-E34, E65-E88
3-026 Diseases of the nervous system G00-G98
3-027 Meningitis G00, G03
3-028 Remainder of diseases of the nervous system G04-G98
3-029 Diseases of the ear and mastoid process H60-H93
3-030 Diseases of the circulatory system I00-I99
3-031 Diseases of the respiratory system J00-J98
3-032 Pneumonia J12-J18
3-033 Other acute respiratory infections J00-J11, J20-J22
3-034 Remainder of diseases of the respiratory system J30-J98
3-035 Diseases of the digestive system K00-K92
3-036 Diseases of the genitourinary system N00-N98
3-037 Certain conditions originating in the perinatal period P00-P96
1037
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
3-038 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal factors and by complications P00-P04
     of pregnancy, labour and delivery
3-039 Disorders relating to length of gestation and fetal growth P05-P08
3-040 Birth trauma P10-P15
3-041 Intrauterine hypoxia and birth asphyxia P20-P21
3-042 Respiratory distress of newborn P22
3-043 Congenital pneumonia P23
3-044 Other respiratory conditions of newborn P24-P28
3-045 Bacterial sepsis of newborn P36
3-046 Omphalitis of newborn with or without mild haemorrhage P38
3-047 Haemorrhagic and haematological disorders of fetus and newborn P50-P61
3-048 Remainder of perinatal conditions P29, P35, P37, P39, P70-P96
3-049 Congenital malformations, deformations, and chromosomal Q00-Q99
      abnormalities 
3-050 Congenital hydrocephalus and spina bifida Q03, Q05
3-051 Other congenital malformations of the nervous system Q00-Q02, Q04, Q06-Q07
3-052 Congenital malformations of the heart Q20-Q24
3-053 Other congenital malformations of the circulatory system Q25-Q28
3-054 Down's syndrome and other chromosomal abnormalities Q90-Q99
3-055 Other congenital malformations Q10-Q18, Q30-Q89
3-056 Symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, R00-R99
     not elsewhere classified
3-057 Sudden infant death syndrome 3-058 Other symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, R00-R94, R96-R99
                                        not elsewhere classified
3-059 All other diseases F01-F99, H00-H59, L00-L98, M00-M99
3-060 External causes of morbidity and mortality V01-Y89
3-061 Transport accidents V01-V99
R95
3-062 Accidental drowning and submersion W65-W74
3-063 Other accidental threats to breathing W75-W84
3-064 Exposure to smoke, fire and flames X00-X09
3-065 Accidental poisoning by and exposure to noxious substances X40-X49
3-066 Assault X85-Y09
3-067 All other external causes W00-W64, W85-W99, X10-X39, X50-X84,
                               Y10-Y89
3-901 SARS U04
1038
SPECIAL TABULATION LISTS FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY
Mortality tabulation list 4
Infant and child mortality
Selected list
4-001 Diarrhoea and gastroenteritis of presumed infectious origin A09
4-002 Other intestinal infectious diseases A00-A08
4-003 Tuberculosis A15-A19
4-004 Tetanus A33, A35
4-005 Diphtheria A36
4-006 Whooping cough A37
4-007 Meningococcal infection A39
4-008 Septicaemia A40-A41
4-009 Acute poliomyelitis A80
4-010 Measles B05
4-011 Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease B20-B24
4-012 Other viral diseases A81-B04, B06-B19, B25-B34
4-013 Malaria B50-B54
4-014 Remainder of certain infectious and parasitic diseases A20-A32, A38, A42-A79, B35-B49, B55-
                                                            B94, B99
4-015 Leukaemia C91-C95
4-016 Remainder of malignant neoplasms C00-C90, C96-C97
4-017 Anaemias D50-D64
4-018 Remainder of diseases of the blood and blood-forming organs and D65-D89
      certain disorders involving the immune mechanism 
4-019 Malnutrition and other nutritional deficiencies E40-E64
4-020 Meningitis G00, G03
4-021 Remainder of diseases of the nervous system G04-G98
4-022 Pneumonia J12-J18
4-023 Other acute respiratory infections J00-J11, J20-J22
4-024 Diseases of the digestive system K00-K92
4-025 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal factors and by complications P00-P04
     of pregnancy, labour and delivery
4-026 Disorders relating to length of gestation and fetal growth P05-P08
4-027 Birth trauma P10-P15
4-028 Intrauterine hypoxia and birth asphyxia P20-P21
4-029 Respiratory distress of newborn P22
4-030 Congenital pneumonia P23
4-031 Other respiratory conditions of newborn P24-P28
4-032 Bacterial sepsis of newborn P36
4-033 Omphalitis of newborn with or without mild haemorrhage P38
4-034 Haemorrhagic and haematological disorders ;of fetus and newborn P50-P61
4-035 Remainder of perinatal conditions P29, P35, P37, P39, P70-P96
4-036 Congenital hydrocephalus and spina bifida Q03, Q05
4-037 Other congenital malformations of the nervous system Q00-Q02, Q04, Q06-Q07
1039
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
4-038 Congenital malformations of the heart 4-039 Other congenital malformations of the circulatory system Q25-Q28
4-040 Down's syndrome and other chromosomal abnormalities Q90-Q99
4-041 Other congenital malformations Q10-Q18, Q30-Q89
4-042 Sudden infant death syndrome R95
4-043 Other symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, R00-R94, R96-R99
     not elsewhere classified
4-044 All other diseases D00-D48, E00-E34, E65-E88, F01-F99,
                        H00-H95, I00-I99, J30-J98, L00-L98, M00-
                       M99, N00-N98
4-045 Transport accidents V01-V99
4-046 Accidental drowning and submersion W65-W74
4-047 Other accidental threats to breathing W75-W84
4-048 Exposure to smoke, fire and flames X00-X09
4-049 Accidental poisoning by and exposure to noxious substances X40-X49
4-050 Assault X85-Y09
4-051 All other external causes W00-W64, W85-W99, X10-X39, X50-X84,
                               Y10-Y89
4-901 SARS U04
1040
Q20-Q24
SPECIAL TABULATION LISTS FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY
Tabulation list for morbidity
001 Cholera A00
002 Typhoid and paratyphoid fevers A01
003 Shigellosis A03
004 Amoebiasis A06
005 Diarrhoea and gastroenteritis of presumed infectious origin A09
006 Other intestinal infectious diseases A02, A04-A05, A07-A08
007 Respiratory tuberculosis A15-A16
008 Other tuberculosis A17-A19
009 Plague A20
010 Brucellosis A23
011 Leprosy A30
012 Tetanus neonatorum A33
013 Other tetanus A34-A35
014 Diphtheria A36
015 Whooping cough A37
016 Meningococcal infection A39
017 Septicaemia A40-A41
018 Other bacterial diseases A21-A22, A24-A28, A31-A32, A38, A42-
                            A49
019 Congenital syphilis A50
020 Early syphilis A51
021 Other syphilis A52-A53
022 Gonococcal infection A54
023 Sexually transmitted chlamydial diseases A55-A56
024 Other infections with a predominantly sexual mode of transmission A57-A64
025 Relapsing fevers A68
026 Trachoma A71
027 Typhus fever A75
028 Acute poliomyelitis A80
029 Rabies A82
030 Viral encephalitis A83-A86
031 Yellow fever A95
032 Other arthropod-borne viral fevers and viral haemorrhagic fevers A90-A94, A96-A99
033 Herpesviral infections B00
034 Varicella and zoster B01-B02
035 Measles B05
036 Rubella B06
037 Acute hepatitis B B16
038 Other viral hepatitis B15, B17-B19
039 Human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] disease B20-B24
040 Mumps B26
1041
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
041 Other viral diseases A81, A87-A89, B03-B04, B07-B09, B25,
                        B27-B34
042 Mycoses B35-B49
043 Malaria B50-B54
044 Leishmaniasis B55
045 Trypanosomiasis B56-B57
046 Schistosomiasis B65
047 Other fluke infections B66
048 Echinococcosis B67
049 Dracunculiasis B72
050 Onchocerciasis B73
051 Filariasis B74
052 Hookworm diseases B76
053 Other helminthiases B68-B71, B75, B77-B83
054 Sequelae of tuberculosis B90
055 Sequelae of poliomyelitis B91
056 Sequelae of leprosy B92
057 Other infectious and parasitic diseases A65-A67, A69-A70, A74, A77-A79, B58-
                                           B64, B85-B89, B94, B99
058 Malignant neoplasm of lip, oral cavity and pharynx C00-C14
059 Malignant neoplasm of oesophagus C15
060 Malignant neoplasm of stomach C16
061 Malignant neoplasm of colon C18
062 Malignant neoplasm of rectosigmoid junction, rectum, anus and anal C19-C21
   canal
063 Malignant neoplasm of liver and intrahepatic bile ducts C22
064 Malignant neoplasm of pancreas C25
065 Other malignant neoplasms of digestive organs C17, C23-C24, C26
066 Malignant neoplasms of larynx C32
067 Malignant neoplasm of trachea, bronchus and lung C33-C34
068 Other malignant neoplasms of respiratory and intrathoracic organs C30-C31, C37-C39
069 Malignant neoplasm of bone and articular cartilage C40-C41
070 Malignant melanoma of skin C43
071 Other malignant neoplasms of skin C44
072 Malignant neoplasms of mesothelial and soft tissue C45-C49
073 Malignant neoplasm of breast C50
074 Malignant neoplasm of cervix uteri C53
075 Malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified parts of uterus C54-C55
076 Other malignant neoplasms of female genital organs C51-C52, C56-C58
077 Malignant neoplasm of prostate C61
078 Other malignant neoplasms of male genital organs C60, C62-C63
079 Malignant neoplasm of bladder C67
080 Other malignant neoplasms of urinary tract C64-C66, C68
081 Malignant neoplasm of eye and adnexa C69
1042
SPECIAL TABULATION LISTS FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY
082
Malignant neoplasm of brain
C71
083 Malignant neoplasm of other parts of central nervous system
C70, C72
084 Malignant neoplasm of other, ill-defined, secondary, unspecified and C73-C80, C97
   multiple sites
085 Hodgkin's disease
C81
086 Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
C82-C85
087 Leukaemia
C91-C95
088 Other malignant neoplasms of lymphoid, haematopoietic and related C88-C90, C96
   tissue
089 Carcinoma in situ of cervix uteri
D06
090 Benign neoplasm of skin
D22-D23
091 Benign neoplasm of breast
D24
092 Leiomyoma of uterus
D25
093 Benign neoplasm of ovary
D27
094 Benign neoplasm of urinary organs
D30
095 Benign neoplasm of brain and other parts of central nervous system D33
096 Other in situ and benign neoplasms and neoplasms of uncertain and D00-D05, D07-D21, D26, D28-D29, D31-
   unknown behaviour
  D32, D34-D48
097 Iron deficiency anaemia
D50
098 Other anaemias
D51-D64
099 Haemorrhagic conditions and other diseases of blood and blood-
   forming organs
D65-D77
100 Certain disorders involving the immune mechanism
D80-D89
101 Iodine-deficiency-related thyroid disorders
E00-E02
102 Thyrotoxicosis
E05
103 Other disorders of thyroid
E03-E04, E06-E07
104 Diabetes mellitus
E10-E14
105 Malnutrition
E40-E46
106 Vitamin A deficiency
E50
107 Other vitamin deficiencies
E51-E56
108 Sequelae of malnutrition and other nutritional deficiencies
E64
109 Obesity
E66
110 Volume depletion E86
111 Other endocrine, nutritional and metabolic disorders E15-E35, E58-E63, E65, E67-E85, E87-E90
112 Dementia F00-, F03
113 Mental and behavioural disorders due to use of alcohol F10
114 Mental and behavioural disorders due to other psychoactive substance F11-F19
   use
115 Schizophrenia, schizotypal, and delusional disorders F20-F29
116 Mood [affective] disorders F30-F39
117 Neurotic, stress-related, and somatoform disorders F40-F48
118 Mental retardation F70-F79
119 Other mental and behavioural disorders F04-F09, F50-F69, F80-F99
120 Inflammatory diseases of the central nervous system G00-G09
1043
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
121
Parkinson's disease
G20
122 Alzheimer's disease G30
123 Multiple sclerosis G35
124 Epilepsy G40-G41
125 Migraine and other headache syndromes G43-G44
126 Transient cerebral ischaemic attacks and related syndromes G45
127 Nerve, nerve root and plexus disorders G50-G59
128 Cerebral palsy and other paralytic syndromes G80-G83
129 Other diseases of the nervous system G10-G13, G21-G26, G31-G32, G36-G37,
                                        G46-G47, G60-G73, G90-G99
130 Inflammation of eyelid H00-H01
131 Conjunctivitis and other disorders of conjunctiva H10-H13
132 Keratitis and other disorders of sclera and cornea H15-H19
133 Cataract and other disorders of lens H25-H28
134 Retinal detachments and breaks H33
135 Glaucoma H40-H42
136 Strabismus H49-H50
137 Disorders of refraction and accommodation H52
138 Blindness and low vision H54
139 Other diseases of the eye and adnexa H02-H06, H20-H22, H30-H32, H34-H36,
                                        H43-H48, H51, H53, H55-H59
140 Otitis media and other disorders of middle ear and mastoid H65-H75
141 Hearing loss H90-H91
142 Other diseases of the ear and mastoid process H60-H62, H80-H83, H92-H9
143 Acute rheumatic fever I00-I02
144 Chronic rheumatic heart disease I05-I09
145 Essential (primary) hypertension I10
146 Other hypertensive diseases I11-I15
147 Acute myocardial infarction I21-I22
148 Other ischaemic heart diseases I20, I23-I25
149 Pulmonary embolism I26
150 Conduction disorders and cardiac arrhythmias I44-I49
151 Heart failure I50
152 Other heart diseases I27-I43, I51-I52
153 Intracranial haemorrhage I60-I62
154 Cerebral infarction I63
155 Stroke, not specified as haemorrhage or infarction I64
156 Other cerebrovascular diseases I65-I69
157 Atherosclerosis I70
158 Other peripheral vascular diseases I73
159 Arterial embolism and thrombosis I74
160 Other diseases of arteries, arterioles and capillaries I71-I72, I77-I79
161 Phlebitis, thrombophlebitis, venous embolism and thrombosis I80-I82
1044
SPECIAL TABULATION LISTS FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY
162
Varicose veins of lower extremities I83
163 Haemorrhoids I84
164 Other diseases of the circulatory system I85-I99
165 Acute pharyngitis and acute tonsillitis J02-J03
166 Acute laryngitis and tracheitis J04
167 Other acute upper respiratory infections J00-J01, J05-J06
168 Influenza J10-J11
169 Pneumonia J12-J18
170 Acute bronchitis and acute bronchiolitis J20-J21
171 Chronic sinusitis J32
172 Other diseases of nose and nasal sinuses J30-J31, J33-J34
173 Chronic disease of tonsils and adenoids J35
174 Other diseases of upper respiratory tract J36-J39
175 Bronchitis, emphysema and other chronic obstructive pulmonary J40-J44
    diseases 
176 Asthma J45-J46
177 Bronchiectasis J47
178 Pneumoconiosis J60-J65
179 Other diseases of the respiratory system J22, J66-J99
180 Dental caries K02
181 Other disorders of teeth and supporting structures K00-K01, K03-K08
182 Other diseases of the oral cavity, salivary glands and jaws K09-K14
183 Gastric and duodenal ulcer K25-K27
184 Gastritis and duodenitis K29
185 Other diseases of oesophagus, stomach and duodenum K20-K23, K28, K30-K31
186 Diseases of appendix K35-K38
187 Inguinal hernia K40
188 Other hernia K41-K46
189 Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis K50-K51
190 Paralytic ileus and intestinal obstruction without hernia K56
191 Diverticular disease of intestine K57
192 Other diseases of intestines and peritoneum K52-K55, K58-K67
193 Alcoholic liver disease K70
194 Other diseases of liver K71-K77
195 Cholelithiasis and cholecystitis K80-K81
196 Acute pancreatitis and other diseases of the pancreas K85-K86
197 Other diseases of the digestive system K82-K83, K87-K93
198 Infections of the skin and subcutaneous tissue L00-L08
199 Other diseases of the skin and subcutaneous L10-L99
200 Rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory polyarthropathies M05-M14
201 Arthrosis M15-M19
202 Acquired deformities of limbs M20-M21
203 Other disorders of joints M00-M03, M22-M25
1045
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
204 Systemic connective tissue disorders 
M30-M36
205 Cervical and other intervertebral disc disorders M50-M51
206 Other dorsopathies M40-M49, M53-M54
207 Soft tissue disorders M60-M79
208 Disorders of bone density and structure M80-M85
209 Osteomyelitis M86
210 Other diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective tissue M87-M99
211 Acute and rapidly progressive nephritic syndromes N00-N01
212 Other glomerular diseases N02-N08
213 Renal tubulo-interstitial diseases N10-N16
214 Renal failure N17-N19
215 Urolithiasis N20-N23
216 Cystitis N30
217 Other diseases of the urinary system N25-N29, N31-N39,
218 Hyperplasia of prostate N40
219 Other disorders of prostate N41-N42
220 Hydrocele and spermatocele N43
221 Redundant prepuce, phimosis and paraphimosis N47
222 Other diseases of male genital organs N44-N46, N48-N51
223 Disorders of the breast N60-N64
224 Salpingitis and oophoritis N70
225 Inflammatory disease of cervix uteri N72
226 Other inflammatory diseases of female pelvic organs N71, N73-N77
227 Endometriosis N80
228 Female genital prolapse N81
229 Noninflammatory disorders of ovary, fallopian tube and broad N83
    ligament 
230 Disorders of menstruation N91-N92
231 Menopausal and other perimenopausal disorders N95
232 Female infertility N97
233 Other disorders of genitourinary tract N82, N84-N90, N93-N94, N96, N98-N99
234 Spontaneous abortion O03
235 Medical abortion O04
236 Other pregnancies with abortive outcome O00-O02, O05-O08
237 Oedema, proteinuria and hypertensive disorders in pregnancy, O10-O16
    childbirth and the puerperium 
238 Placenta praevia, premature separation of placenta and antepartum O44-O46
    haemorrhage 
239 Other maternal care related to fetus and amniotic cavity and possible O30-O43, O47-O48
   delivery problems
240 Obstructed labour O64-O66
241 Postpartum haemorrhage O72
242 Other complications of pregnancy and delivery O20-O29, O60-O63, O67-O71, O73-O75,
                                                 O81-O84
1046
SPECIAL TABULATION LISTS FOR MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY
243 Single spontaneous delivery O80
244 Complications predominantly related to the puerperium and other O85-O99
    obstetric conditions, not elsewhere classified 
245 Fetus and newborn affected by maternal factors and by complications P00-P04
   of pregnancy, labour and delivery
246 Slow fetal growth, fetal malnutrition and disorders related to short P05-P07
    gestation and low birth weight 
247 Birth trauma P10-P15
248 Intrauterine hypoxia and birth asphyxia P20-P21
249 Other respiratory disorders originating in the perinatal period P22-P28
250 Congenital infectious and parasitic diseases P35-P37
251 Other infections specific to the perinatal period P38-P39
252 Haemolytic disease of fetus and newborn P55
253 Other conditions originating in the perinatal period
P08, P29, P50-P54, P56-P96
254 Spina bifida
Q05
255 Other congenital malformations of the nervous system
Q00-Q04, Q06-Q07
256 Congenital malformations of the circulatory system
Q20-Q28
257 Cleft lip and cleft palate
Q35-Q37
258 Absence, atresia and stenosis of small intestine
Q41
259 Other congenital malformations of the digestive system
Q38-Q40, Q42-Q45
260 Undescended testicle
Q53
261 Other malformations of the genitourinary system
Q50-Q52, Q54-Q64
262 Congenital deformities of hip
Q65
263 Congenital deformities of feet
Q66
264 Other congenital malformations and deformations of the
   musculoskeletal system
Q67-Q79
265 Other congenital malformations
Q10-Q18, Q30-Q34, Q80-Q89
266 Chromosomal abnormalities, not elsewhere classified
Q90-Q99
267 Abdominal and pelvic pain
R10
268 Fever of unknown origin
R50
269 Senility
R54
270 Other symptoms, signs and abnormal clinical and laboratory findings, R00-R09, R11-R49, R51-R53, R55-R99
   not elsewhere classified
271 Fracture of skull and facial bones
S02
272 Fracture of neck, thorax or pelvis
S12, S22, S32, T08
273 Fracture of femur
S72
274 Fractures of other limb bones
S42, S52, S62, S82, S92, T10, T12
275 Fractures involving multiple body regions T02
276 Dislocations, sprains and strains of specified and multiple body S03, S13, S23, S33, S43, S53, S63, S73, S83,
    regions S93, T03
277 Injury of eye and orbit S05
278 Intracranial injury S06
279 Injury of other internal organs S26-S27, S36-S37
1047
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
280 Crushing injuries and traumatic amputations of specified and multiple S07-S08, S17-S18, S28, S38, S47-S48, S57-
   body regions
  S58, S67-S68, S77-S78, S87-S88, S97-S98,
 T04-T05
281 Other injuries of specified, unspecified and multiple body regions
S00-S01, S04, S09-S11, S14-S16, S19-S21,
S24-S25, S29-S31, S34-S35, S39-S41, S44-
S46, S49-S51, S54-S56, S59-S61, S64-S66,
S69-S71, S74-S76, S79-S81, S84-S86, S89-
S91, S94-S96, S99, T00-T01, T06-T07, T09,
T11, T13-T14
282 Effects of foreign body entering through natural orifice
T15-T19
283 Burns and corrosions
T20-T32
284 Poisoning by drugs and biological substances
T36-T50
285 Toxic effects of substances chiefly nonmedicinal as to source
T51-T65
286 Maltreatment syndrome
T74
287 Other and unspecified effects of external causes
T33-T35, T66-T73, T75-T78
288 Certain early complications of trauma and complications of surgical T79-T88
   and medical care, not elsewhere classified
289 Sequelae of injuries, poisoning and of other consequences of external T90-T98
   causes
290 Persons encountering health services for examination and
   investigation
291 Asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection status Z21
292 Other persons with potential health hazards related to communicable Z20, Z22-Z29
   disease
293 Contraceptive management
Z30
294 Antenatal screening and other supervision ;of pregnancy
Z34-Z36
295 Liveborn infants according to place of birth
Z38
296 Postpartum care and examination
Z39
297 Persons encountering health services for specific procedures and
   health care
Z40-Z54
298 Persons encountering health services for other reasons
Z31-Z33, Z37, Z55-Z99
901 SARS
U04
1048
Z00-Z13
Appendix A — New ICD-10-CA Codes for 2009
This appendix provides a list of the new codes that were added to version 2007. This information should be taken into consideration
when trending data from one version to the next.
A09.0 Other and unspecified gastroenteritis and colitis of infectious origin
A09.9 Gastroenteritis and colitis of unspecified origin
B17.9 Acute viral hepatitis, unspecified
B97.81 Human metapneumovirus as the cause of diseases classified to other chapters
C79.9 Secondary malignant neoplasm, unspecified site
C80.0 Malignant neoplasm, primary site unknown, so stated
C80.9 Malignant neoplasm, unspecified
D00.08 Carcinoma in situ of oral cavity, other specified site
D68.5 Primary Thrombophilia
D68.6 Other Thrombophilia
D68.8 Other specified coagulation defects
D89.3 Immune reconstitution syndrome
E10.23 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with established or advanced kidney disease
E10.36 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with advanced ophthalmic disease
E10.64 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described
E11.23 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with established or advanced kidney disease
E11.36 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with advanced ophthalmic disease
E11.64 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described
E13.23 Other specified diabetes mellitus with established or advanced kidney disease
E13.36 Other specified diabetes mellitus with advanced ophthalmic disease
E13.64 Other specified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described
E14.23 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with established or advanced kidney disease
E14.36 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with advanced ophthalmic disease
E14.64 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with poor control, so described
E88.3 Tumour lysis syndrome
E88.80 Metabolic syndrome
E88.88 Other specified metabolic disorders
G14 Postpolio syndrome
G21.4 Vascular parkinsonism
G40.00 Localization-related (focal) (partial) idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with seizures of localized onset, not
      stated as intractable
G40.01 Localization-related (focal) (partial) idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with seizures of localized onset,
      intractable
G40.10 Localization-related (focal) (partial) symptomatic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with simple partial seizures, not
      stated as intractable
G40.11 Localization-related (focal) (partial) symptomatic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with simple partial seizures,
      intractable
G40.20 Localization-related (focal) (partial) symptomatic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with complex partial seizures, not
      stated as intractable
1049
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
G40.21 Localization-related (focal) (partial) symptomatic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with complex partial seizures,
      intractable
G40.30 Generalized idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes, not stated as intractable
G40.31 Generalized idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes, intractable
G40.40 Other generalized idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes, not stated as intractable
G40.41 Other generalized idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes, intractable
G40.50 Special epileptic syndromes, not stated as intractable
G40.51 Special epileptic syndromes, intractable
G40.60 Grand mal seizures, unspecified (with or without petit mal), not stated as intractable
G40.61 Grand mal seizures, unspecified (with or without petit mal), intractable
G40.70 Petit mal, unspecified, without grand mal seizures, not stated as intractable
G40.71 Petit mal, unspecified, without grand mal seizures, intractable
G40.80 Other epilepsy, not stated as intractable
G40.81 Other epilepsy, intractable
G40.90 Epilepsy, unspecified, not stated as intractable
G40.91 Epilepsy, unspecified, intractable
H54.9 Unspecified visual impairment (binocular)
I21.4 Acute subendocardial myocardial infarction
I70.20 Atherosclerosis of arteries of extremities without gangrene
I70.21 Atherosclerosis of arteries of extremities with gangrene
I72.5 Aneurysm and dissection of other precerebral arteries
I98.2 Oesophageal varices without bleeding in diseases classified elsewhere
I98.3 Oesophageal varices with bleeding in disease classified elsewhere
J12.3 Human metapneumovirus pneumonia
J20.80 Acute bronchitis due to human metapneumovirus
J20.88 Acute bronchitis due to other specified organisms
J21.1 Acute bronchiolitis due to human metapneumovirus
J34.80 Mucositis (ulcerative) of nose and nasal sinuses
J34.88 Other specified disorders of nose and nasal sinuses
J95.81 Transfusion related acute lung injury (TRALI)
K12.3 Oral mucositis (ulcerative)
K35.2 Acute appendicitis with generalized peritonitis
K35.3 Acute appendicitis with localized peritonitis
K35.8 Acute appendicitis, other and unspecified
K52.3 Indeterminate colitis
K91.40 Haemorrhage from colostomy stoma
K91.41 Infection of colostomy stoma
K91.43 Haemorrhage from enterostomy stoma
K91.44 Infection of enterostomy stoma
K91.60 Haemorrhage from gastrostomy stoma
K91.61 Infection of gastrostomy stoma
K91.62 Gastrostomy malfunction, not elsewhere classified
K92.80 Mucositis (ulcerative) of the digestive system
1050
APPENDIX A — NEW ICD-10-CA CODES FOR 2009
K92.88
Other specified diseases of digestive system
L97 Ulcer of lower limb, not elsewhere classified
M13.0 Polyarthritis, unspecified
M48.87 Other specified spondylopathies, lumbosacral region
M93.80 Other specified osteochondropathies, multiple sites
M93.81 Other specified osteochondropathies, shoulder region
M93.82 Other specified osteochondropathies, upper arm
M93.83 Other specified osteochondropathies, forearm
M93.84 Other specified osteochondropathies, hand
M93.85 Other specified osteochondropathies, pelvic region and thigh
M93.86 Other specified osteochondropathies, lower leg
M93.88 Other specified osteochondropathies, ankle and foot
M93.89 Other specified osteochondropathies, unspecified site
N08.31 Glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, stage 1
N08.32 Glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, stage 2
N08.33 Glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, stage 3
N08.34 Glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, stage 4
N08.35 Glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, stage 5
N08.38 Other glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus
N08.39 Unspecified glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus
N18.1 Chronic kidney disease, stage 1
N18.2 Chronic kidney disease, stage 2
N18.3 Chronic kidney disease, stage 3
N18.4 Chronic kidney disease, stage 4
N18.5 Chronic kidney disease, stage 5
N76.80 Mucositis (ulcerative) of vagina and vulva
N76.88 Other specified inflammation of vagina and vulva
O26.602 Liver disorders in pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium deilvered with mention of postpartum complication
O26.604 Liver disorders in pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium, postpartum condition or complication
O31.111 Continuing pregnancy after spontaneous abortion of one fetus or more, delivered, with or without mention of
       antepartum condition
O31.113 Continuing pregnancy after spontaneous abortion of one fetus or more, antepartum condition or complication
O31.119 Continuing pregnancy after spontaneous abortion of one fetus or more, unspecified as to episode of care, or not
       applicable
O31.121 Continuing pregnancy after selective fetal reduction of one fetus or more, delivered, with or without mention of
       antepartum condition
O31.123 Continuing pregnancy after selective fetal reduction of one fetus or more, antepartum condition or complication
O31.129 Continuing pregnancy after selective fetal reduction of one fetus or more, unspecified as to episode of care, or not
       applicable
O43.201 Delivered, with or without mention of antepartum condition, morbidly adherent placenta
O43.203 Antepartum condition or complication, morbidly adherent placenta
O43.209 Unspecified as to episode of care, or not applicable, morbidly adherent placenta
O60.301 Preterm delivery without spontaneous labour, with or without mention of antepartum condition
O96.0 Death from direct obstetric cause
1051
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
O96.1 Death from indirect obstetric cause
O96.9 Death from unspecified obstetric cause
O97.0 Death from sequelae of direct obstetric cause
O97.1 Death from sequelae of indirect obstetric cause
O97.9 Death from sequelae of obstetric cause, unspecified
O98.701 Delivered, with or without mention of antepartum condition, human immunodeficiency [HIV] disease complicating
       pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium
O98.702 Delivered, with mention of postpartum complication, human immunodeficiency [HIV] disease complicating
       pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium
O98.703 Antepartum condition or complication, human immunodeficiency [HIV] disease complicating pregnancy, childbirth
       and the puerperium
O98.704 Postpartum condition or complication, human immunodeficiency [HIV] disease complicating pregnancy, childbirth
       and the puerperium
O98.709 Unspecified as to episode of care, or not applicable, human immunodeficiency [HIV] disease complicating pregnancy,
       childbirth and the puerperium
P29.10 Neonatal cardiac arrest
P29.18 Other neonatal cardiac dysrhythmia
P37.50 Topical or gastrointestinal neonatal candidiasis
P37.51 Invasive neonatal candidiasis
P37.58 Other neonatal candidiasis
P37.59 Neonatal candidiasis, unspecified
P78.81 Neonatal oesophageal reflux
R19.50 Positive fecal occult blood test
R19.58 Other fecal abnormalities
R26.3 Immobility
R56.01 Complex febrile convulsions
R56.09 Febrile convulsions, unspecified
R56.80 Seizure disorder, so described
R56.88 Other and unspecified convulsions
R57.2 Septic shock
R63.6 Insufficient intake of food and water due to self neglect
R65.0 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome of infectious origin without organ failure
R65.1 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome of infectious origin with acute organ failure
R65.2 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome of noninfectious origin without organ failure
R65.3 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome of noninfectious origin with acute organ failure
R65.9 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome, unspecified
S06.0 Concussion
S06.1 Traumatic cerebral oedema
S06.25 Diffuse brain injury without open intracranial wound
S06.26 Diffuse brain injury with open intracranial wound
S06.35 Focal brain injury without open intracranial wound
S06.36 Focal brain injury with open intracranial wound
S06.4 Epidural haemorrhage
S06.5 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage
1052
APPENDIX A — NEW ICD-10-CA CODES FOR 2009
S06.6 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage
S06.85 Other intracranial injuries without open intracranial wound
S06.86 Other intracranial injuries with open intracranial wound
S06.9 Intracranial injury, unspecified
S43.402 Sprain and strain of shoulder joint, NOS
S62.410 Multiple fractures of shaft of other metacarpal bones, closed
S62.411 Multiple fractures of shaft of other metacarpal bones, open
S62.420 Multiple fractures of head of other metacarpal bones, closed
S62.421 Multiple fractures of head of other metacarpal bones, open
S62.470 Multiple fractures of multiple sites of other metacarpal bones, closed
S62.471 Multiple fractures of multiple sites of other metacarpal bones, open
S62.490 Multiple fractures unspecified site of other metacarpal bones, closed
S62.491 Multiple fractures unspecified site of other metacarpal bones, open
U82.0 Resistance to penicillin
U82.1 Resistance to methicillin
U82.2 Resistance to other betalactam antibiotics
U82.3 Extended spectrum betalactamase (ESBL) resistance
U82.9 Resistance to betalactam antibiotics, unspecified
U83.0 Resistance to vancomycin
U83.1 Resistance to other vancomycin related antibiotics
U83.2 Resistance to quinolones
U83.7 Resistance to multiple antibiotics only
U83.8 Resistance to other single specified antibiotic
U83.9 Resistance to unspecified antibiotic
U84.0 Resistance to antiparasitic drug(s)
U84.1 Resistance to antifungal drug(s)
U84.2 Resistance to antiviral drug(s)
U84.3 Resistance to tuberculostatic drug(s)
U84.7 Resistance to multiple antimicrobial drugs
U84.8 Resistance to other specified antimicrobial drug
U84.9 Resistance to unspecified antimicrobial drugs
U85 Resistance to antineoplastic drugs
W05.04 Fall involving shopping cart
W09.01 Fall involving swing
W09.02 Fall involving slide
W09.03 Fall involving teeter totter
W09.04 Fall involving monkey bars
W09.05 Fall involving trampoline
W09.08 Fall involving other playground equipment
W09.09 Fall involving unspecified playground equipment
X15.00 Contact with stove (cooker) (kitchen stove) (oven)
X15.01 Contact with hot plate
X15.02 Contact with iron
1053
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
X15.03 Contact with curling iron (ceramic iron) (flat iron)
X15.04 Contact with toaster
X15.05 Contact with saucepan (glass) (metal)
X15.06 Contact with kettle
X15.07 Contact with pot
X15.08 Contact with other hot household appliances
X15.09 Contact with unspecified hot household appliances
X34.0 Victim of cataclysmic earth movements caused by earthquake
X34.1 Victim of tsunami
X34.8 Victim of other specified effects of earthquake
X34.9 Victim of unspecified effects of earthquake
Z22.300 Carrier of drug-resistant staphylococcus
Z22.301 Carrier of drug-resistant streptococcus
Z22.302 Carrier of drug-resistant enterococcus
Z22.303 Carrier of drug-resistant Clostridium difficile
Z22.304 Carrier of drug-resistant Escherichia coli
Z22.308 Carrier of other drug-resistant micro-organism
Z22.309 Carrier of unspecified drug-resistant micro-organism
Z37.000 Single live birth, pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous ovulation and conception
Z37.001 Single live birth, pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART)
Z37.100 Single stillbirth, pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous ovulation and conception
Z37.101 Single stillbirth, pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART)
Z37.200 Twins, both liveborn, pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous ovulation and conception
Z37.201 Twins, both liveborn, pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART)
Z37.300 Twins, one liveborn and one stillborn, pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous ovulation and conception
Z37.301 Twins, one liveborn and one stillborn, pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART)
Z37.400 Twins, both stillborn, pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous ovulation and conception
Z37.401 Twins both stillborn, pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART)
Z37.500 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception triplets, all liveborn
Z37.501 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) triplets, all liveborn
Z37.510 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception quadruplets, all liveborn
Z37.511 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) quadruplets, all liveborn
Z37.520 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception quintuplets, all liveborn
Z37.521 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) quintuplets, all liveborn
Z37.530 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception sextuplets, all liveborn
Z37.531 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) sextuplets, all liveborn
Z37.580 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception other multiple births, all liveborn
Z37.581 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) other multiple births, all liveborn
Z37.590 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception multiple births, unspecified, all liveborn
Z37.591 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) multiple births, unspecified, all liveborn
Z37.600 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception triplets, some liveborn
Z37.601 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) triplets, some liveborn
Z37.610 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception quadruplets, some liveborn
1054
APPENDIX A — NEW ICD-10-CA CODES FOR 2009
Z37.611
Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) quadruplets, some liveborn
Z37.620 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception quintuplets, some liveborn
Z37.621 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) quintuplets, some liveborn
Z37.630 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception sextuplets, some liveborn
Z37.631 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) sextuplets, some liveborn
Z37.680 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception other multiple births, some liveborn
Z37.681 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) other multiple births, some liveborn
Z37.690 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception multiple births, unspecified, some
       liveborn
Z37.691 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) multiple births, unspecified, some liveborn
Z37.700 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception triplets, all stillborn
Z37.701 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) triplets, all stillborn
Z37.710 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception quadruplets, all stillborn
Z37.711 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) quadruplets, all stillborn
Z37.720 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception quintuplets, all stillborn
Z37.721 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) quintuplets, all stillborn
Z37.730 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception sextuplets, all stillborn
Z37.731 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) sextuplets, all stillborn
Z37.780 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception other multiple births, all stillborn
Z37.781 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) other multiple births, all stillborn
Z37.790 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception multiple births, unspecified, all stillborn
Z37.791 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) multiple births, unspecified, all stillborn
Z37.900 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception multiple births, unspecified
Z37.901 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) multiple births, unspecified
Z37.910 Pregnancy resulting from both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception single birth, unspecified
Z37.911 Pregnancy resulting from assisted reproductive technology (ART) single birth unspecified
Z38.000 Singleton, born in hospital, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, delivered vaginally
Z38.001 Singleton born in hospital, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), delivered vaginally
Z38.010 Singleton born in hospital, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, delivered by caesarean
Z38.011 Singleton born in hospital, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), delivered by caesarean
Z38.100 Singleton, born outside hospital, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception
Z38.101 Singleton, born outside hospital, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART)
Z38.200 Singleton, unspecified as to place of birth, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception
Z38.201 Singleton, unspecified as to place of birth, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART)
Z38.300 Twin, born in hospital, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, delivered vaginally
Z38.301 Twin, born in hospital, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), delivered vaginally
Z38.310 Twin, born in hospital, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, delivered by caesarean
Z38.311 Twin, born in hospital, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), delivered by caesarean
Z38.400 Twin, born outside hospital, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception
Z38.401 Twin, born outside hospital, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART)
Z38.500 Twin, unspecified as to place of birth, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception
Z38.501 Twin, unspecified as to place of birth, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART)
Z38.600 Product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, triplet, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
1055
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
Z38.601 Product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), triplet, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.610 Product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, triplet, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.611 Product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), triplet, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.620 Product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, quadruplet, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.621 Product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), quadruplet, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.630 Product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, quadruplet, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.631 Product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), quadruplet, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.640 Product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, quintuplet, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.641 Product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), quintuplet, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.650 Product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, quintuplet, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.651 Product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), quintuplet, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.660 Product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, sextuplet, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.661 Product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), sextuplet, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.670 Product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, sextuplet, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.671 Product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), sextuplet, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.680 Product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, other multiple birth, born in hospital, delivered
       vaginally
Z38.681 Product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), other multiple birth, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.690 Product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception, other multiple birth, born in hospital, delivered by
       caesarean
Z38.691 Product of assisted reproductive technology (ART), other multiple birth, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.700 Other multiple, born outside hospital, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception
Z38.701 Other multiple, born outside hospital, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART)
Z38.800 Other multiple, unspecified as to place of birth, product of both spontaneous (NOS) ovulation and conception
Z38.801 Other multiple, unspecified as to place of birth, product of assisted reproductive technology (ART)
Z76.800 Stem cell transplant candidate
Z76.801 Bone marrow transplant candidate
Z76.802 Kidney transplant candidate
Z76.803 Lung transplant candidate
Z76.804 Liver transplant candidate
Z76.805 Heart transplant candidate
Z76.806 Pancreas transplant candidate
Z76.807 Multiple transplant candidate
Z76.808 Other transplant candidate
Z76.809 Transplant candidate, organ unspecified
Z86.00 Personal history of in-situ neoplasms
Z86.01 Personal history of benign neoplasms
Z86.02 Personal history of neoplasms of uncertain or unknown behavior
Z94.83 Stem cell transplant status
1056
Appendix B — Disabled ICD-10-CA Codes for 2009
This appendix includes a list of all codes that were disabled from version 2007. This information should be taken into consideration
when trending data from one version to the next.
A09 Other gastroenteritis and colitis of infectious and unspecified origin
C80 Malignant neoplasm without specification of site
D68.80 Inherited hypercoagulable states
D68.81 Acquired hypercoagulable states
D68.88 Other specified coagulation defects
E10.21 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with established diabetic nephropathy
E10.22 Type 1 diabetes mellitus with end-stage renal disease [ESRD]
E11.21 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with established diabetic nephropathy
E11.22 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with end-stage renal disease [ESRD]
E11.35 Type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic cataract
E13.21 Other specified diabetes mellitus with established diabetic nephropathy
E13.22 Other specified diabetes mellitus with end-stage renal disease [ESRD]
E13.35 Other specified diabetes mellitus with diabetic cataract
E14.21 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with established diabetic nephropathy
E14.22 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with end-stage renal disease [ESRD]
E14.35 Unspecified diabetes mellitus with diabetic cataract
E88.8 Other specified metabolic disorders
G40.0 Localization-related (focal)(partial) idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with seizures of localized onset
G40.1 Localization-related (focal)(partial) symptomatic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with simple partial seizures
G40.2 Localization-related (focal)(partial) symptomatic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes with complex partial seizures
G40.3 Generalized idiopathic epilepsy and epileptic syndromes
G40.4 Other generalized epilepsy and epileptic syndromes
G40.5 Special epileptic syndromes
G40.6 Grand mal seizures, unspecified (with or without petit mal)
G40.7 Petit mal, unspecified, without grand mal seizures
G40.8 Other epilepsy
G40.9 Epilepsy, unspecified
H54.7 Unspecified visual loss
I21.40 Acute subendocardial myocardial infarction of anterior wall
I21.41 Acute subendocardial myocardial infarction of inferior wall
I21.42 Acute subendocardial myocardial infarction of other sites
I21.49 Acute subendocardial myocardial infarction, unspecified site
I70.2 Atherosclerosis of arteries of extremities
I98.20 Oesophageal varices in diseases classified elsewhere with bleeding
I98.21 Oesophageal varices in diseases classified elsewhere without bleeding
J20.8 Acute bronchitis due to other specified organisms
J34.8 Other specified disorders of nose and nasal sinuses
1057
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
K35.0 Acute appendicitis with generalized peritonitis
K35.1 Acute appendicitis with peritoneal abscess
K35.9 Acute appendicitis, unspecified
K51.1 Ulcerative (chronic) ileocolitis
K91.46 Gastrostomy malfunction, not elsewhere classified
K92.8 Other specified diseases of digestive system
L89.4 Decubitus ulcer with depth involving bone (Stage 5)
L89.5 Decubitus ulcer with joint space involvement (Stage 5)
L97.0 Ulcer of lower limb limited to erythema only [redness] without skin breakdown (Stage 1)
L97.1 Ulcer of lower limb limited to breakdown of skin (Stage 2)
L97.2 Ulcer of lower limb with fat layer exposed (Stage 3)
L97.3 Ulcer of lower limb with depth involving muscle (Stage 4)
L97.4 Ulcer of lower limb with depth involving bone (Stage 5)
L97.5 Ulcer of lower limb with joint space involvement (Stage 5)
L97.8 Ulcer of lower limb with necrosis involving muscle or bone (Stage X)
L97.9 Ulcer of lower limb without mention of severity
M13.00 Polyarthritis, unspecified, multiple sites
M13.01 Polyarthritis, unspecified, shoulder region
M13.02 Polyarthritis, unspecified, upper arm
M13.03 Polyarthritis, unspecified, forearm
M13.04 Polyarthritis, unspecified, hand
M13.05 Polyarthritis, unspecified, pelvic region and thigh
M13.06 Polyarthritis, unspecified, lower leg
M13.07 Polyarthritis, unspecified, ankle and foot
M13.08 Polyarthritis, unspecified, other site
M13.09 Polyarthritis, unspecified, unspecified site
M93.8 Other specified osteochondropathies
N08.3 Glomerular disorders in diabetes mellitus
N18.0 End-stage renal disease
N18.8 Other chronic renal failure
N76.8 Other specified inflammation of vagina and vulva
N99.59 Complication of external stoma of urinary tract, unspecified
O31.101 Continuing pregnancy after abortion of one fetus or more, delivered, with or without mention of antepartum condition
O31.103 Continuing pregnancy after abortion of one fetus or more, antepartum condition or complication
O31.109 Continuing pregnancy after abortion of one fetus or more, unspecified as to episode of care, or not applicable
O96 Death from any obstetric cause occurring more than 42 days but less than one year after delivery
O97 Death from sequelae of obstetric causes
P29.1 Neonatal cardiac dysrhythmia
P37.5 Neonatal candidiasis
R19.5 Other faecal abnormalities
R56.0 Febrile convulsions
R56.8 Other and unspecified convulsions
S06.000 Concussion without loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
1058
APPENDIX B — DISABLED ICD-10-CA CODES FOR 2009
S06.001
Concussion without loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.010 Concussion with brief loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.011 Concussion with brief loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.020 Concussion with moderate loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.021 Concussion with moderate loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.030 Concussion with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of consciousness without open
       intracranial wound
S06.031 Concussion with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of consciousness with open
       intracranial wound
S06.040 Concussion with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pres-existing level of consciousness without open
       intracranial wound
S06.041 Concussion with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pres-existing level of consciousness with open
       intracranial wound
S06.090 Concussion with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration without open intracranial wound
S06.091 Concussion with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration with open intracranial wound
S06.100 Traumatic cerebral oedema without loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.101 Traumatic cerebral oedema without loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.110 Traumatic cerebral oedema with brief loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.111 Traumatic cerebral oedema with brief loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.120 Traumatic cerebral oedema with moderate loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.121 Traumatic cerebral oedema with moderate loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.130 Traumatic cerebral oedema with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of consciousness
       without open intracranial wound
S06.131 Traumatic cerebral oedema with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of consciousness with
       open intracranial wound
S06.140 Traumatic cerebral oedema with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of consciousness
       without open intracranial wound
S06.141 Traumatic cerebral oedema with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of consciousness
       with open intracranial wound
S06.190 Traumatic cerebral oedema with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration without open intracranial wound
S06.191 Traumatic cerebral oedema with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration with open intracranial wound
S06.200 Diffuse brain injury without loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.201 Diffuse brain injury without loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.210 Diffuse brain injury with brief loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.211 Diffuse brain injury with brief loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.220 Diffuse brain injury with moderate loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.221 Diffuse brain injury with moderate loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.230 Diffuse brain injury with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of consciousness without
       open intracranial wound
S06.231 Diffuse brain injury with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of consciousness with open
       intracranial wound
S06.240 Diffuse brain injury with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of consciousness without
       open intracranial wound
S06.241 Diffuse brain injury with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of consciousness with
       open intracranial wound
S06.290 Diffuse brain injury with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration without open intracranial wound
1059
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S06.291 Diffuse brain injury with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration with open intracranial wound
S06.300 Focal brain injury without loss of consciousness, without open intracranial wound
S06.301 Focal brain injury without loss of consciousness, with open intracranial wound
S06.310 Focal brain injury with brief loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.311 Focal brain injury with brief loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.320 Focal brain injury with moderate loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.321 Focal brain injury with moderate loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.330 Focal brain injury with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of consciousness without open
       intracranial wound
S06.331 Focal brain injury with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of consciousness with open
       intracranial wound
S06.340 Focal brain injury with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of consciousness without
       open intracranial wound
S06.341 Focal brain injury with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of consciousness with open
       intracranial wound
S06.390 Focal brain injury with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration without open intracranial wound
S06.391 Focal brain injury with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration with open intracranial wound
S06.400 Epidural haemorrhage without loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.401 Epidural haemorrhage without loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.410 Epidural haemorrhage with brief loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.411 Epidural haemorrhage with brief loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.420 Epidural haemorrhage with moderate loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.421 Epidural haemorrhage with moderate loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.430 Epidural haemorrhage with prolonged loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.431 Epidural haemorrhage with prolonged loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.440 Epidural haemorrhage with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of consciousness
       without open intracranial wound
S06.441 Epidural haemorrhage with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of consciousness with
       open intracranial wound
S06.490 Epidural haemorrhage with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration without open intracranial wound
S06.491 Epidural haemorrhage with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration with open intracranial wound
S06.500 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage without loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.501 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage without loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.510 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage with brief loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.511 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage with brief loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.520 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage with moderate loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.521 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage with moderate loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.530 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of
       consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.531 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of
       consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.540 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of
       consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.541 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of
       consciousness with open intracranial wound
1060
APPENDIX B — DISABLED ICD-10-CA CODES FOR 2009
S06.590
Traumatic subdural haemorrhage with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration without open intracranial wound
S06.591 Traumatic subdural haemorrhage with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration with open intracranial wound
S06.600 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage without loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.601 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage without loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.610 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage with brief loss of consciousness without intracranial wound
S06.611 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage with brief loss of consciousness with intracranial wound
S06.620 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage with moderate loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.621 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage with moderate loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.630 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of
       consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.631 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of
       consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.640 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of
       consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.641 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of
       consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.690 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration without open intracranial
       wound
S06.691 Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration with open intracranial wound
S06.800 Other intracranial injuries without loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.801 Other intracranial injuries without loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.810 Other intracranial injuries with brief loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.811 Other intracranial injuries with brief loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.820 Other intracranial injuries with moderate loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.821 Other intracranial injuries with moderate loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.830 Other intracranial injuries with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of consciousness
       without open intracranial wound
S06.831 Other intracranial injuries with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of consciousness with
       open intracranial wound
S06.840 Other intracranial injuries with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of consciousness
       without open intracranial wound
S06.841 Other intracranial injuries with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of consciousness
       with open intracranial wound
S06.890 Other intracranial injuries with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration without open intracranial wound
S06.891 Other intracranial injuries with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration with open intracranial wound
S06.900 Intracranial injury, unspecified without loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.901 Intracranial injury, unspecified without loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.910 Intracranial injury, unspecified with brief loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.911 Intracranial injury, unspecified with brief loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.920 Intracranial injury, unspecified with moderate loss of consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.921 Intracranial injury, unspecified with moderate loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.930 Intracranial injury, unspecified with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of consciousness
       without open intracranial wound
S06.931 Intracranial injury, unspecified with prolonged loss of consciousness with return to pre-existing level of consciousness
       with open intracranial wound
1061
INTERNATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES
S06.940 Intracranial injury, unspecified with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of
       consciousness without open intracranial wound
S06.941 Intracranial injury, unspecified with prolonged loss of consciousness without return to pre-existing level of
       consciousness with open intracranial wound
S06.990 Intracranial injury, unspecified with loss of consciousness of unspecified duration without open intracranial wound
S06.991 Intracranial injury, unspecified without loss of consciousness with open intracranial wound
S43.71 Sprain and strain of other and unspecified parts of shoulder girdle, infraspinatus (muscle) (tendon)
S43.72 Sprain and strain of other and unspecified parts of shoulder girdle, subscapularis (muscle)
S43.73 Sprain and strain of other and unspecified parts of shoulder girdle, supraspinatus (muscle)
U80.0 Penicillin resistant agent
U80.1 Methicillin resistant agent
U80.8 Agent resistant to other penicillin related antibiotic
U81.0 Vancomycin resistant agent
U81.8 Agent resistant to other vancomycin related antibiotic
U88 Agent resistant to multiple antibiotics
U89.8 Agent resistant to other single specified antibiotic
U89.9 Agent resistant to unspecified antibiotic
U97 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome [SIRS]
W09 Fall involving playground equipment
X15 Contact with hot household appliances
X34 Victim of earthquake
Z22.30 Carrier of drug-resistant micro-organism
Z37.0 Single live birth
Z37.1 Single stillbirth
Z37.2 Twins, both liveborn
Z37.3 Twins, one liveborn and one stillborn
Z37.4 Twins, both stillborn
Z37.50 Triplets, all liveborn
Z37.51 Quadruplets, all liveborn
Z37.52 Quintuplets, all liveborn
Z37.53 Sextuplets, all liveborn
Z37.58 Other multiple births, all liveborn
Z37.59 Multiple births, unspecified, all liveborn
Z37.60 Triplets, some liveborn
Z37.61 Quadruplets, some liveborn
Z37.62 Quintuplets, some liveborn
Z37.63 Sextuplets, some liveborn
Z37.68 Other multiple births, some liveborn
Z37.69 Multiple births, unspecified, some liveborn
Z37.70 Triplets, all stillborn
Z37.71 Quadruplets, all stillborn
Z37.72 Quintuplets, all stillborn
Z37.73 Sextuplets, all stillborn
1062
APPENDIX B — DISABLED ICD-10-CA CODES FOR 2009
Z37.78
Other multiple births, all stillborn
Z37.79 Multiple births, unspecified, all stillborn
Z37.90 Multiple births unspecified
Z37.91 Single birth, unspecified
Z38.00 Singleton, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.01 Singleton, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.1 Singleton, born outside hospital
Z38.2 Singleton, unspecified as to place of birth
Z38.30 Twin, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.31 Twin, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.4 Twin, born outside hospital
Z38.5 Twin, unspecified as to place of birth
Z38.60 Triplet, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.61 Triplet, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.62 Quadruplet, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.63 Quadruplet, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.64 Quintuplet, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.65 Quintuplet, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.66 Sextuplet, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.67 Sextuplet, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.68 Other multiple birth, born in hospital, delivered vaginally
Z38.69 Other multiple birth, born in hospital, delivered by caesarean
Z38.7 Other multiple, born outside hospital
Z38.8 Other multiple, unspecified as to place of birth
Z76.80 Organ transplant candidate
Z86.0 Personal history of other neoplasms
Z87.11 Personal history of colonic polyps
1063
